
Seven principles For making marriage work
By John M. Gottman, Ph.D, and Nan Silver
CROWN PUBLISHERS, INC.
NEW YORK
The anecdotes in this book are based on Dr. Gottman's research. Some
of the couples are composites of those who volunteered to take part in
his studies. In all cases, names and identifying information have been
changed. Grateful acknowledgment is made for permission to reprint
from After the Honeymoon
To Julie Gottman, who gives collaboration a new meaning, and to the
core of my team: Sybil Carr ere, Sharon Fentiman, and Cathryn Swan
son. They made it all possible and helped make the journey itself
delightful, like eating pastries and drinking coffee together in a
sidewalk cafe.
J.G.
To Arthur, my beloved and my friend
N. S.
Acknowledgments
First and foremost, I need to acknowledge the brave gift that several
thousand volunteer research couples have contributed to my
understanding. Their willingness to reveal the most private aspects of
their personal lives has opened a hitherto closed door that has made it
possible to construct these Seven Principles for making marriages
work.
This book was based on research that received continuous
support from the National Institute of Mental Health, the Behavioral
Science Research Branch. Of great assistance was the dedicated
guidance of Molly Olive ri, Delia Hahn, and Joy Schulterbrandt.
This book was also made possible by a number of important
collaborations that have been a joyful part of my life. These include
the main collaboration that has graced my life for the past nineteen
years with Professor Robert Levenson of the University of California.
Also important to me has been my collaboration with NeilJacob
son of the University of Washington and my work with Dr. Laura
Carstensen of Stanford University I have been blessed with rich
associations inside my laboratory.
The cornerstones have been Sharon Fentiman, whose elegance
greatly improves my life and keeps me from chaos; Dr. Sybil Cart ere,
who runs my lab and is a terrific colleague; and Cathryn Swan son,
my programmer and data analyst. Not only are they friends and
intellectual companions, but they help make coming to work a
pleasant experience. I also wish to acknowledge the contributions and
stimulation of Lynn Katz.
My wife, Julie Schwartz Gottman, provided love, friendship,
motivation, intellectual camaraderie, support, and conceptual
organization. She has also been my teacher and guide in practicing
psychotherapy. She made doing the couples' and parents' workshops
an exciting creative experience. While we are busy with our full-time
jobs, Etana Dykan capably runs our Seattle Marital and Family
Institute with great spirit and attention to detail, and she also helps
facilitate our communication. Her amazingly creative brother, Shai
Steinberg, has also been a tremendous asset in many areas of our
work. Linda Wright helps us keep the couples' enterprise very warm
and human--she is unusually gifted in talking to desperate couples.
Peter Langsam has been our faithful consultant and partner
throughout, helping us with wise counsel, elemental guidance, and
business sense.
I have recently been blessed with excellent students and staff,
including Kim Buehlman, Jim Coan, Melissa Hawkins, Carole
Hooven, Vanessa Kahen, Lynn Katz, Michael Lorber, Kim McCoy,
Janni Morford, Sonny Ruckstahl, Regina Rushe, Kimberly Ryan,
Alyson Shapiro, Tim Stickle, and Beverly Wilson.
I need to acknowledge the intellectual heritage upon which I
draw. As Newton once wrote, "If I have seen further ... it is by
standing upon the shoulders of giants." For me these shoulders
include the work of Les Green berg and Susan Johnson on
emotionally focused marital therapy; Bob Weiss's scholarly work on
many concepts, including sentiment overrides; Cliff Notarius's work
on many concepts, including couple efficacy; Howard Mark man's
faith in preventive intervention; Dick Stuart's great contributions,
including his approach to behavior exchange; Jerry Lewis's work
focusing on the balance of autonomy and connectedness in marriage;
and the persistent work of my colleague Neil Jacob son, who is the
gold standard for marital therapy research. I am also indebted to
Jacob son's recent work with Andy Christensen, on acceptance in
marital therapy I also wish to acknowledge the contributions of Peggy
Papp and Pepper Schwartz and their feminist approach to gender
differences and egalitarian marriage, as well as the work of Ronald
Levant and Alan Booth on men in families.
I must also mention Clan Wile's work on marital therapy, with
its superb focus on process. I love Wile's writing and thinking. They
are entirely consistent with many of my research findings. I think that
Wile is a genius and the greatest living marital therapist. I am blessed
to have been able to exchange ideas with him.
I wish to acknowledge the work of Irvin Yalom and Victor
Frankl on existential psychotherapy. Yalom has provided a great faith
in the therapeutic process itself and in the human force toward
growth. Frankl holds a special place in my heart. He and my beloved
cousin Kurt Ladner were both residents and survivors of the Dachau
concentration camp. Both found meaning in the context of intense
suffering, tyranny, and dehumanization. I hope to bring their
existential search for meaning into the marital context. Doing so can
turn conflict into a new experience of revealing and honoring life
dreams, finding shared meaning, and reaffirming the marital
friendship.
I have come to the conclusion that many insightful writers in
the marital field are basically correct. I hope my contribution will be
to honor them all, adding a bit of precision and integration to the
struggle to understand what makes close relationships work.
J.G.
Contents
1 Inside the Seatle Love Lab: The Truth about Happy Marriages…………………...1
2 How I Predict Divorce ...................................................................................................... 25
3 Principle 1: Enhance Your Love Maps ....................................................................... 47
4 Principle 2: Nurture Your Fondness and Admiration ..................................... 61
5 Principle 3: Turn toward Each Other Instead of Away .................................... 79
6 Principle 4: Let Your Partner Influence You ......................................................... 99
7 The Two Kinds of Maritial Conflict .......................................................................... 129
8 Principle 5: Solve Your Solvable Problems ............................................................ 157
9 Coping with Typical Solvable Problems .................................................................. 187
10 Principle 6: Overcome Gridlock ................................................................................ 217
11 Principle 7: Create Shared Meaning ........................................................................ 243
Afterword: What Now?...................................................................................................... 259
g{x
SEVEN PRINCIPLES SEVEN PRINCIPLES
yÉÜ
MAKING
MARRIAGE MARRIAGE
WORK

1
1
Inside the Seattle Love Inside the Seattle LoveLab:
The Truth about The Truth about
Happy Marriages Happy Marriages
It's a surprisingly cloudless Seattle morning as newly-weds
Mark and Janice Gordon sit down to breakfast. Outside the
apartment's picture window, the waters of Mont lake cut a deep-blue
swath, while runners jog and geese waddle along the lakeside park.
Mark and Janice are enjoying the view as they munch on their French
toast and share the Sunday paper. Later Mark will probably switch on
the football game while Janice chats over the phone with her mom in
St. Louis.
All seems ordinary enough inside this studio apartment--until
you notice the three video cameras bolted to the wall, the
microphones clipped talk-show style to Mark's and Janice's collars,
and the Holter monitors strapped around their chests. Mark and
Janice's lovely studio with a view is really not their apartment at all.
It's a laboratory at the University of Washington in Seattle, where for
sixteen years I have spearheaded the most extensive and innovative
research ever into marriage and divorce.
As part of one of these studies, Mark and Janice (as well as
forty-nine other randomly selected couples) volunteered to stay overnight in our fabricated apartment, affectionately known as the Love
2
Lab. Their instructions were to act as naturally as possible, despite my
team of scientists observing them from behind the one-way kitchen
mirror, the cameras recording their every word and facial expression,
and the sensors tracking bodily signs of stress or relaxation, such as
how quickly their hearts pound. (To preserve basic privacy, the
couples were monitored only from nine a.m. to nine P.M. and never
while in the bathroom.) The apartment comes equipped with a foldout sofa, a working kitchen, a phone, Tv VCR, and CD player.
Couples were told to bring their groceries, their newspapers, their
laptops, needlepoint, hand weights, even their pets-whatever they
would need to experience a typical weekend.
My goal has been nothing more ambitious than to uncover the
truth about marriage--to finally answer the questions that have
puzzled people for so long: Why is marriage so tough at times? Why
do some lifelong relationships click, while others just tick away like a
time bomb? And how can you prevent a marriage from going bad--or
rescue one that already has?
Predicting divorce with 91 percent accuracy

After years of research I can finally answer these questions. In fact, I
am now able to predict whether a couple will stay happily together or
lose their way. I can make this prediction after listening to the couple
interact in our Love Lab for as little as five minutes! My accuracy rate
in these predictions averages 91 percent over three separate studies.
In other words, in 91 percent of the cases where I have predicted that
a couple's marriage would eventually fail or succeed, time has proven
me right. These predictions are not based on my intuition or
preconceived notions of what marriage "should" be, but on the data
I've accumulated over years of study.
At first you might be tempted to shrug off my research results
as just another in a long line of newfangled theories. It's certainly easy
to be cynical when someone tells you they've figured out what really
makes marriages last and can show you how to rescue or divorceproof your own. Plenty of people consider themselves to be experts
3
on marriage--and are more than happy to give you their opinion of
how to form a more perfect union.
But that's the key word--opinion. Before the breakthroughs my
research provided, point of view was pretty much all that anyone
trying to help couples had to go on. And that includes just about
every qualified, talented, and well-trained marriage counselor out
there. Usually a responsible therapist's approach to helping couples is
based on his or her professional training and experience, intuition,
family history, perhaps even religious conviction. But the one thing
it's not based on is hard scientific evidence. Because until now there
really hasn't been any rigorous scientific data about why some
marriages succeed and others flop.
For all of the attention my ability to predict divorce has earned
me, the most rewarding findings to come out of my studies are the
Seven Principles that will prevent a marriage from breaking up.
Emotionally intelligent marriages
What can make a marriage work is surprisingly simple. Happily
married couples aren't smarter, richer, or more psychologically astute
than others. But in their day-to-day lives, they have hit upon a
dynamic that keeps their negative thoughts and feelings about each
other (which all couples have) from overwhelming their positive
ones. They have what I call an emotionally intelligent marriage.
I can predict whether a couple will divorce after I can predict whether a couple will divorce after
watching and watching andlistening to them for just five minutes. listening to them for just five minutes. listening to them for just five minutes.
Recently, emotional intelligence has become widely recognized
as an important predictor of a child's success later in life. The more in
touch with emotions and the better able a child is to understand and
get along with others, the sunnier that child's future, whatever his or
her academic IQ. The same is true for relationships between spouses.
The more emotionally intelligent a couple -- the better able they are to
understand, honor, and respect each other and their marriage -- the
4
more likely that they will indeed live happily ever after. Just as
parents can teach their children emotional intelligence, this is also a
skill that a couple can be taught. As simple as it sounds, it can keep
husband and wife on the positive side of the divorce odds.
Why save your marriage?
Speaking of those odds, the divorce statistics remain dire. The
chance of a first marriage ending in divorce over a forty-year period is
67 percent. Half of all divorces will occur in the first seven years.
Some studies find the divorce rate for second marriages is as
much as 10 percent higher than for first-timers. The chance of getting
divorced remains so high that it makes sense for all married couples--
including those who are currently satisfied with their relationship--to
put extra effort into their marriages to keep them strong.
One of the saddest reasons a marriage dies is that neither
spouse recognizes its value until it is too late. Only after the papers
have been signed, the furniture divided, and separate apartments
rented do the exes realize how much they really gave up when they
gave up on each other. Too often a good marriage is taken for granted
rather than given the nurturing and respect it deserves and
desperately needs. Some people may think that getting divorced or
languishing in an unhappy marriage is no big deal--they may even
consider it trendy. But there's now plenty of evidence documenting
just how harmful this can be for all involved.
Thanks to the work of researchers like Lois Verbrugge and
James House, both of the University of Michigan, we now know that
an unhappy marriage can increase your chances of getting sick by
roughly 35 percent and even shorten your life by an average of four
years. The flip side: People who are happily married live longer,
healthier lives than either divorced people or those who are
unhappily married. Scientists know for certain that these differences
exist, but we are not yet sure why.
5
Part of the answer may simply be that in an unhappy marriage
people experience chronic, diffuse physiological arousal—in other
words, they feel physically stressed and usually emotionally stressed
as well. This puts added wear and tear on the body and mind, which
can present itself in any number of physical ailments, including high
blood pressure and heart disease, and in a host of psychological ones,
including anxiety, depression, suicide, violence, psychosis, homicide,
and substance abuse.
Not surprisingly, happily married couples have a far lower rate
of such maladies. They also tend to be more health-conscious than
others.Researchers theorize that this is because spouses keep after
each other to have regular checkups, take medicine, eat nutritiously,
and so on.
People who stay married live four years People who stay married live four years
longer than people who don't. longer than people who don't.
Recently my laboratory uncovered some exciting, preliminary
evidence that a good marriage may also keep you healthier by
directly benefiting your immune system, which spearheads the
body's defenses against illness. Researchers have known for about a
decade that divorce can depress the immune system's function.
Theoretically this lowering in the system's ability to fight foreign
invaders could leave you open to more infectious diseases and
cancers. Now we have found that the opposite may also be true. Not
only do happily married people avoid this drop in immune function,
but their immune systems may even be getting an extra boost.
When we tested the immune system responses of the fifty
couples who stayed overnight in the Love Lab, we found a striking
difference between those who were very satisfied with their
marriages and those whose emotional response to each other was
neutral or who were unhappy. Specifically, we used blood samples
from each subject to test the response of certain of their white blood
cells-the immune system's major defense weapons. In general,
happily married men and women showed a greater proliferation of
6
these white blood cells when exposed to foreign invaders than did the
other subjects.
We also tested the effectiveness of other immune system
warriors—the natural killer cells, which, true to their name, destroy
body cells that have been damaged or altered (such as infected or
cancerous ones) and are known to limit the growth of tumor cells.
Again, subjects who were satisfied with their marriage had more
effective natural killer cells than did the others.
It will take more study before scientists can confirm that this
boost in the immune system is one of the mechanisms by which a
good marriage benefits your health and longevity. But what's most
important is that we know for certain that a good marriage does. In
fact, I often think that if fitness buffs spent just 10 percent of their
weekly workout time--say, twenty minutes a day--working on their
marriage instead of their bodies, they would get three times the
health benefits the derive from climbing the Stair-Master!
When a marriage goes sour, husband and wife are not the only
ones to suffer--the children do, too. In a study I conducted of sixtythree preschoolers, those being raised in homes where there was great
marital hostility had chronically elevated levels of stress hormones
compared with the other children studied. We don't know what the
long-term repercussions of this stress will be for their health. But we
do know that this biological indication of extreme stress was echoed
in their behavior. We followed them through age fifteen and found
that, compared with other children their age, these kids suffered far
more from truancy, depression, peer rejection, behavioral problems
(especially aggression), low achievement at school, and even school
failure.
One important message of these findings is that it is not wise to
stay in a bad marriage for the sake of your children. It is clearly
harmful to raise kids in a home that is subsumed by hostility between
the parents. A peaceful divorce is better than a warlike marriage.
Unfortunately, divorces are rarely peaceful. The mutual hostility
between the parents usually continues after the breakup. For that
reason, children of divorce often fare just as poorly as those caught in
the crossfire of a miserable marriage.
7
Innovative research, revolutionary findings
When it comes to saving a marriage, the stakes are high for everybody in the family. And yet despite the documented importance of
marital satisfaction, the amount of scientifically sound research into
keeping marriages stable and happy is shockingly small. When I first
began researching marriage in 1972, you could probably have held all
of the "good" scientific data on marriage in one hand. By "good" I
mean findings that were collected using scientific methods as
rigorous as those used by medical science. For example, many studies
of marital happiness were conducted solely by having husbands and
wives fill out questionnaires. This approach is called the self-report
method, and although it has its uses, it is also quite limited. How do
you know a wife is happy just because she checks the "happy" box on
some form? Women in physically abusive relationships, for example,
score very high on questionnaires about marital satisfaction. Only if
the woman feels safe and is interviewed one on one does she reveal
her agony.
To address this paucity of good research, my colleagues and I
have supplemented traditional approaches to studying marriage with
many innovative, more extensive methods. We are now following
seven hundred couples in seven different studies. We have not just
studied newlyweds but long-term couples who were first assessed
while in their forties or sixties. We have also studied couples just
becoming parents and couples interacting with their babies, their
preschoolers, and their teenagers.
As part of this research, I have interviewed couples about the
history of their marriage, their philosophy about marriage, how they
viewed their parents' marriages. I have videotaped them talking to
each other about how their day went, discussing areas of continuing
disagreement in their marriage, and also conversing about joyful
topics. And to get a physiological read of how stressed or relaxed
they were feeling, I measured their heart rate, blood flow, sweat
output, blood pressure, and immune function moment by moment. In
all of these studies, I'd play back the tapes to the couples and ask
them for an insiders' perspective of what they were thinking and
8
feeling when, say, their heart rate or blood pressure suddenly surged
during a marital discussion. And I've kept track of the couples,
checking in with them at least every year to see how their relationship
is faring.
So far my colleagues and I are the only researchers to conduct
such an exhaustive observation and analysis of married couples. Our
data offer the first real glimpse of the inner workings—the anatomy--
of marriage. The results of these studies, not my own opinions, form
the basis of my Seven Principles for making marriage work. These
principles, in turn, are the cornerstones of a remarkably effective
short-term therapy for couples that I have developed along with my
wife, clinical psychologist Julie Gottman, Ph.D. This therapy, and
some briefer workshops that follow the same principles, are intended
for couples who find that their marriage is in trouble or just want to
ensure it stays strong.
Our approach contrasts dramatically with the standard one
offered by most marriage therapists. This is because as my research
began to uncover the true story of marriage, I had to throw out some
long-hallowed beliefs about marriage and divorce.
Why most marriage therapy fails
If you've had or are having troubles in your relationship, you've
probably gotten lots of advice. Sometimes it seems like everybody
who's ever been married or knows anyone who's ever been married
thinks he holds the secret to guaranteeing endless love. But most of
these notions, whether intoned by a psychologist on TV or by a wise
manicurist at the local mall, are wrong. Many such theories, even
those initially espoused by talented theorists, have been long
discredited--or deserve to be. But they have become so firmly
entrenched in the popular culture that you'd never know it.
Perhaps the biggest myth of all is that communication--and
more specifically learning to resolve your conflicts --- is the royal
road to romance and an enduring, happy marriage. Whatever a
marriage therapist's theoretical orientation, whether you opt for short
9
term therapy, long-term therapy, or a three-minute radio consultation
with your local Frasier, the message you'll get is pretty uniform:
Learn to communicate better. The sweeping popularity of this
approach is easy to understand. When most couples find themselves
in a conflict (whether it gets played out as a short spat, an all-out
screaming match, or stony silence), they each gird themselves to win
the fight. They become so focused on how hurt they feel, on proving
that they're right and their spouse is wrong, or on keeping up a cold
shoulder, that the lines of communication between the two may be
overcome by static or shut down altogether. So it seems to make sense
that calmly and lovingly listening to each other's perspective would
lead couples to find compromise solutions and regain their marital
composure.
The most common technique recommended for resolving
conflict--used in one guise or another by most marital therapists--is
called active listening. For example, a therapist might urge you to try
some form of the listener-speaker exchange. Let's say Judy is upset
that Bob works late most nights. The therapist asks Judy to state her
complaints as "I" statements that focus on what she's feeling rather
than hurling accusations at Bob. Judy will say, "I feel lonely and
overwhelmed when I'm home alone with the kids night after night
while you're working late," rather than, "It's so selfish of you to
always work late and expect me to take care of the kids by myself."
Then Bob is asked to paraphrase both the content and the
feelings of Judy's message, and to check with her if he's got it right.
(This shows he is actively listening to her.) He is also asked to
validate her feelings--to let her know he considers them legitimate,
that he respects and empathizes with her even if he doesn't share her
perspective. He might say: "It must be hard for you to watch the kids
by yourself when I'm working late." Bob is being asked to suspend
judgment, not argue for his point of view, and to respond non
defensively. "I hear you" is a common active-listening buzz word.
Thanks to Bill Clinton, "I feel your pain" may now be the most
notorious.
By forcing couples to see their differences from each other's
perspective, problem solving is supposed to take place without anger.
10
This approach is often recommended whatever the specific issue—
whether your conflict concerns the size of your grocery bill or major
differences in your lifelong goals. Conflict resolution is touted not
only as a cure-all for troubled marriages but as a tonic that can
prevent good marriages from faltering.
Where did this approach come from? The pioneers of marital
therapy adapted it from techniques used by the renowned
psychotherapist Carl Rogers. For individual psychotherapy Rogerian
psychotherapy had its heyday in the 1960s and is still practiced in
varying degrees by psychotherapists today. His approach entails
responding in a nonjudgmental and accepting manner to all feelings
and thoughts the patient expresses. For example, if the patient says, "I
just hate my wife, she's such a nagging bitch," the therapist nods and
says something like "I hear you saying that your wife nags you and
you hate that." The goal is to create an empathetic environment so the
patient feels safe exploring his inner thoughts and emotions and
confiding in the therapist.
Since marriage is also, ideally, a relationship in which people
feel safe being themselves, it might seem to make sense to train
couples to practice this sort of unconditional understanding. Conflict
resolution is certainly easier if each party expresses empathy for the
other's perspective.
The problem is that it doesn't work. A Munich-based marital
therapy study conducted by Dr. Kurt Hahlweg and associates found
that even after employing active listening techniques the typical
couple was still distressed. Those few couples who did benefit
relapsed within a year.
The wide range of marital therapies based on conflict resolution
share a very high relapse rate. In fact, the best of this type of marital
therapy, conducted by Neil Jacob son, Ph.D." of the University of
Washington, has only a 35 percent success rate. In other words, his
own studies show that only 35 percent of couples see a meaningful
improvement in their marriages as a result of the therapy. A year
later, less than half of that group--or just 18 percent of all couples
who entered therapy-- retain these benefits. When Consumer Reports
surveyed a large sample of its members on their experience with all
kinds of psychotherapists, most got very high customer satisfaction
11
marks--except for marital therapists, who got very poor ratings. This
survey may not qualify as rigorous scientific research, but it confirms
what most professionals in this field know: In the long run, current
approaches to marital therapy do not benefit the majority of couples.
When you really think about it, it's not difficult to see why
active listening so often fails. Bob might do his best to listen
thoughtfully to Judy's complaints. But he is not a therapist listening to
a patient whine about a third party. The person his wife is trashing
behind all of those "I" statements is him. There are some people who
can be magnanimous in the face of such criticism--the Dalai Lama
comes to mind. But it's unlikely that you or your spouse is married to
one of them. (Even in Rogerian therapy, when the client starts
complaining about the therapist, the therapist switches from empathy
to other therapeutic approaches.) Active listening asks couples to
perform Olympic-level emotional gymnastics when their relationship
can barely walk.
If you think validation and active listening will make conflict
resolution easier for you and your spouse, by all means use it. There
are circumstances where it can certainly come in handy. But here's the
catch: Even if it does make your fights "better" or less frequent, it
alone cannot save your marriage.
Even happily married couples can have Even happily married couples can have
screaming matches-- screaming matches--loud arguments loud arguments loud arguments
don't necessarily harm a marriage. don't necessarily harm a marriage.
After studying some 650 couples and tracking the fate of their
marriages for up to fourteen years, we now understand that this
approach to counseling doesn't work, not just because it's nearly
impossible for most couples to do well, but more importantly because
successful conflict resolution isn't what makes marriages succeed.
One of the most startling findings of our research is that most couples
who have maintained happy marriages rarely do anything that even
partly resembles active listening when they're upset.
12
Consider one couple we studied, Belle and Charlie. After more
than forty-five years of marriage, Belle informed Charlie that she
wished they had never had children. This clearly rankled him. What
followed was a conversation that broke all the active listening rules.
This discussion doesn't include a lot of validation or empathythey both jump right in, arguing their point.
Charlie: You think you would have been better off if I had backed
you in not having children?
Belle: Having children was such an insult to me, Charlie.
Charlie: No. Hold on a minute.
Belle: To reduce me to such a level!
Charlie: I'm not reduBelle: I wanted so much to share a life with you. Instead I ended up a
drudge.
Charlie: Now wait a minute, hold on. I don't think not having
children is that simple. I think that there's a lot biologically that you're
ignoring.
Belle: Look at all the wonderful marriages that have been childless.
Charlie: Who?
Belle: The Duke and Duchess of Windsor!
Charlie (deep sigh): Please!
Belle: He was the king! He married a valuable woman. They had a
very happy marriage.
Charlie: I don't think that's a fair example. First of all, she was forty.
That makes a difference.
Belle: She never had children. And he fell in love with her not
because she was going to reproduce.
Charlie: But the fact is, Belle, that there is a real strong biological urge
to have children.
Belle: That's an insult to think that I'm regulated by biology.
Charlie: I can't help it!
Belle: Well, anyway, I think we would have had a ball without
children.
Charlie: Well, I think we had a ball with the kids, too.
Belle: I didn't have that much of a ball.
13
Charlie and Belle may not sound like June and Ward Cleaver,
but they have been happily married for over forty-five years. They
both say they are extremely satisfied with their marriage and devoted
to each other.
No doubt they have been having similar in-your-face
discussions for years. They don't end off angrily, either. They go on to
discuss why Belle feels this way about motherhood. Her major regret
is that she wasn't more available to spend time with Charlie. She
wishes she hadn't always been so cranky and tired. There's a lot of
affection and laughter as they hash this out. Neither of their heart
rates or blood pressures indicate distress. The bottom line of what
Belle is saying is that she loves Charlie so much, she wishes she had
had more time with him. Clearly, there's something very positive
going on between them that overrides their argumentative style.
Whatever that "something" is, marriage counseling, with its emphasis
on "good" fighting, doesn't begin to help other couples tap into it.
Exploding more myths about marriage

The notion that you can save your marriage just by learning to
communicate more sensitively is probably the most widely held
misconception about happy marriages--but it's hardly the only one.
Over the years I've found many other myths that are not only false
but potentially destructive to a marriage because they can lead
couples down the wrong path or, worse, convince them that their
marriage is a hopeless case. Among these common myths:
Neuroses or personality problems ruin marriages. You might
assume that people with hang-ups would be ill suited for marriage.
But research has found only the weakest connection between run-ofthe-mill neuroses and failing at love. The reason: We all have our
crazy buttons—issues we're not totally rational about. But they don't
necessarily interfere with marriage. The key to a happy marriage isn't
having a "normal" personality but finding someone with whom you
mesh. For example, Sam has a problem dealing with authority--he
14
hates having a boss. If he were married to an authoritarian woman
who tended to give commands and tried to tell him what to do, the
result would be disastrous. But instead he is married to Megan, who
treats him like a partner and doesn't try to boss him around. They've
been happily married for ten years.
Contrast them with another couple who do run into marital
problems. Jill has a deep-seated fear of abandonment due to her
parents' divorcing when she was very young. Her husband, Wayne,
who is truly devoted to her, is a debonair ladies' man who flirts
shamelessly at parties. When she complains, he points out that he is
100 percent faithful to her and insists she lighten up and let him enjoy
this harmless pleasure. But the threat Jill perceives from his
flirtations--and his unwillingness to stop--drives them to separate and
eventually divorce.
The point is that neuroses don't have to ruin a marriage. What
matters is how you deal with them. If you can accommodate each
other's strange side and handle it with caring, affection, and respect,
your marriage can thrive.
Common interests keep you together. That all depends on how
you interact while pursuing those interests. One husband and wife
who love kayaking may glide smoothly down the water, laughing,
talking, and concentrating together. Their love of kayaking enriches
and deepens their fondness and interest in each other.
Another couple may equally share a love of kayaking but not
the same mutual respect. Their travels may be punctuated with
"That's not the way to do a J-stroke, you idiot!" or irritated silences.
It's hard to see how pursuing their common interest is in the best
interest of their marriage.
You scratch my back and… Some researchers believe that what
distinguishes good marriages from failing ones is that in good
marriages spouses respond in kind to positive overtures from the
other. In other words, they meet a smile with a smile, a kiss with a
kiss. When one helps the other with a chore, the other intentionally
15
reciprocates, and so on. In essence, the couple function with an
unwritten agreement to offer recompense for each kind word or deed.
In bad marriages this contract has broken down, so that anger and
resentment fill the air. By making the floundering couple aware of the
need for some such "contract," the theory goes, their interactions
could be repaired.
But it's really the unhappy marriage where this quid pro quo
operates, where each feels the need to keep a running tally of who has
done what for whom. Happy spouses do not keep tabs on whether
their mate is washing the dishes as a payback because they cooked
dinner. They just do it because they generally feel positive about their
spouse and their relationship. If you find yourself keeping score
about some issue with your spouse, that suggests it's an area of
tension in your marriage.
Avoiding conflict will ruin your marriage. "Tell it like it is" has
become a pervasive attitude. But honesty is not best for all marriages.
Plenty of lifelong relationships happily survive even though the
couple tend to shove things under the rug. Take Allan and Betty.
When Allan gets annoyed at Betty he turns on ESPN. When Betty is
upset with him, she heads for the mall. Then they regroup and go on
as if nothing happened. Never in forty years of marriage have they sat
down to have a "dialogue" about their relationship. Neither of them
could tell you what a "validating" statement is. Yet they will tell you
honestly that they are both very satisfied with their marriage and that
they love each other deeply, hold the same values, love to fish and
travel together, and wish for their children as happy a married life as
they have shared.
Couples simply have different styles of conflict. Some avoid
fights at all costs, some fight a lot, and some are able to "talk out" their
differences and find a compromise without ever raising their voices.
No one style is necessarily better than the other--as long as the style
works for both people.
Couples can run into trouble if one partner always wants to talk
out a conflict while the other just wants to watch the playoffs.
16
Affairs are the root cause of divorce. In most cases it's the other
way around. Problems in the marriage that send the couple on a
trajectory to divorce also send one (or both) of them looking for
intimate connection outside the marriage. Most marital therapists
who write about extramarital affairs find that these trysts are usually
not about sex but about seeking friendship, support, understanding,
respect, attention, caring, and concern--the kind of things that
marriage is supposed to offer. In probably the most reliable survey
ever done on divorce, by Lynn Gigy, Ph.D." and Joan Kelly, Ph.D."
from the Divorce Mediation Project in Corte Madera, California, 80
percent of divorced men and women said their marriage broke up
because they gradually grew apart and lost a sense of closeness, or
because they did not feel loved and appreciated. Only 20 to 27 percent
of couples said an extramarital affair was even partially to blame.
Men are not biologically "built" for marriage. A corollary to
the notion that affairs cause divorce, this theory holds that men are
philanderers by nature and are therefore ill suited for monogamy. It's
supposedly the law of the jungle--the male of the species looks to
create as many offspring as possible, so his allegiance to any one mate
remains superficial. Meanwhile the female, given the large task of
tending to the young, looks for a single mate who will provide well
for her and her children.
But whatever natural laws other species follow, among humans
the frequency of extramarital affairs does not depend on gender so
much as on opportunity. Now that so many women work outside the
home, the rate of extramarital affairs by women has skyrocketed.
According to Annette Lawson, Ph.D. of the University of California,
Berkeley's Institute of Human Development, since women have
entered the workplace in massive numbers, the number of
extramarital affairs of young women now slightly exceeds those of
men.
Men and women are from different planets. According to a
rash of best-selling books, men and women can't get along because
males are "from Mars" and females "from Venus." However,
17
successful marriages also comprise respective "aliens." Gender
differences may contribute to marital problems, but they don't cause
them.
The determining factor in whether wives feel The determining factor in whether wives feel he determining factor in whether wives feel
satisfied with the sex, satisfied with the sex,romance, and passion in their romance, and passion in their romance, and passion in their
marriage is, by 70 percent, the quality marriage is, by 70 percent, the qualityof the
couple's friendship. For men, the determining couple's friendship. For men, the determining
factor is, by 70 factor is, by 70 percent, the quality of the couple's percent, the quality of the couple's percent, the quality of the couple's
friendship. friendship.So men and women come So men and women come So men and women comefrom the from the from the
same planet after all. same planet after all.
I could go on and on. The point is not just that there are plenty
of myths out there about marriage, but that the false information they
offer can be disheartening to couples who are desperately trying to
make their marriage work. If these myths imply one thing, it's that
marriage is an extremely complex, imposing institution that most of
us just aren't good enough for. I'm not suggesting that marriage is
easy. We all know it takes courage, determination, and resiliency to
maintain a long-lasting relationship. But once you understand what
really makes a marriage tick, saving or safeguarding your own will
become simpler.
What does make marriage work?
The advice I used to give couples earlier in my career was pretty
much what you'd hear from virtually any marital therapist--the same
old pointers about conflict resolution and communication skills. But
after looking squarely at my own data, I had to face the harsh facts:
Getting couples to disagree more "nicely" might reduce their stress
levels while they argued, but frequently it wasn't enough to pump life
back into their marriages.
The right course for these couples became clear only after I
analyzed the interactions of couples whose marriages sailed smoothly
through troubled waters. Why was it that these marriages worked so
well? Were these couples more intelligent, more stable, or simply
18
more fortunate than the others? Could whatever they had be taught
to other couples?
It soon became apparent that these happy marriages were never
perfect unions. Some couples who said they were very satisfied with
each other still had significant differences in temperament, in
interests, in family values. Conflict was not infrequent. They argued,
just as the unhappy couples did, over money, jobs, kids,
housekeeping, sex, and in-laws. The mystery was how they so
adroitly navigated their way through these difficulties and kept their
marriages happy and stable.
It took studying hundreds of couples until I finally uncovered
the secrets of these emotionally intelligent marriages. No two
marriages are the same, but the more closely I looked at happy
marriages the clearer it became that they were alike in seven telltale
ways. Happily married couples may not be aware that they follow
these Seven Principles, but they all do. Unhappy marriages always
came up short in at least one of these seven areas--and usually in
many of them. By mastering these Seven Principles, you can ensure
that your own marriage will thrive. You'll learn to identify which of
these components are weak spots, or potential weak spots, in your
marriage, and to focus your attention where your marriage most
needs it. In the chapters ahead we'll fill you in on all the secrets to
maintaining (or regaining) a happy marriage, and hold your hand as
you apply the techniques to your own marriage.
The evidence, please
How can I be so confident that doing this will benefit your marriage?
Because unlike other approaches to helping couples, mine is based on
knowing what makes marriages succeed rather than on what makes
them fail. I don't have to guess anymore about why some couples stay
so happily married. I know why I have documented just what makes
happily married couples different from everybody else.
19
I am confident that the Seven Principles work not just because
my data suggest they should, but because the hundreds of couples
who attended our workshops so far have confirmed to me that they
do. Almost all of these couples came to us because their marriage was
in deep distress--some were on the verge of divorce. Many were
skeptical that a simple two-day workshop based on the Seven
Principles could turn their relationship around. Fortunately their
skepticism was unfounded. Our findings indicate that these
workshops have made a profound and powerful difference in these
couples' lives.
Couples who attend my workshop have a Couples who attend my workshop have a
relapse rate that's about half relapse rate that's about halfthat from that from that from
standard marital therapy. standard marital therapy.

When it comes to judging the effectiveness of marital therapy,
nine months seems to be the magic number. Usually by then the
couples who are going to relapse after therapy already have. Those
who retain the benefits of therapy through the first nine months tend
to continue them long-term. So we put our workshops to the test by
doing an extensive nine-month follow-up of 640 couples. I'm happy to
report an astoundingly low relapse rate. The nationwide relapse rate
for standard marital therapy is 30 to 50 percent. Our rate is 20 percent.
We found that at the beginning of our workshops, 27 percent of
couples were at very high risk for divorce. At our three-month followup that proportion was 6.7 percent and at nine months it was 0
percent. But even couples who were not at high risk for divorce were
significantly helped by the workshops.
Friendship versus fighting

At the heart of my program is the simple truth that happy marriages
are based on a deep friendship. By this I mean a mutual respect for
and enjoyment of each other's company. These couples tend to each
20
other intimately--they are well versed in each other's likes, dislikes,
personality quirks, hopes, and dreams. They have an abiding regard
for each other and express this fondness not just in the big ways but
in little ways day in and day out.
Take the case of hardworking Nathaniel, who runs his own
import business and works very long hours. In another marriage, his
schedule might be a major liability. But he and his wife Olivia have
found ways to stay connected. They talk frequently on the phone
during the day. When she has a doctor's appointment, he remembers
to call to see how it went. When he has a meeting with an important
client, she'll check in to see how it fared. When they have chicken for
dinner, she gives him both drumsticks because she knows he likes
them best. When he makes blueberry pancakes for the kids Saturday
morning, he'll leave the blueberries out of hers because he knows she
doesn't like them. Although he's not religious, he accompanies her to
church each Sunday because it's important to her. And although she's
not crazy about spending a lot of time with their relatives, she has
pursued a friendship with Nathaniel's mother and sisters because
family matters so much to him.
If all of this sounds humdrum and unromantic, it's anything
but. Through small but important ways Olivia and Nathaniel are
maintaining the friendship that is the foundation of their love. As a
result they have a marriage that is far more passionate than do
couples who punctuate their lives together with romantic vacations
and lavish anniversary gifts but have fallen out of touch in their daily
lives.
Friendship fuels the flames of romance because it offers the best
protection against feeling adversarial toward your spouse. Because
Nathaniel and Olivia have kept their friendship strong despite the
inevitable disagreements and irritations of married life, they are
experiencing what is known technically as "positive sentiment
override." This means that their positive thoughts about each other
and their marriage are so pervasive that they tend to supersede their
negative feelings. It takes a much more significant conflict for them to
lose their equilibrium as a couple than it would otherwise. Their
positivity causes them to feel optimistic about each other and their
21
marriage, to assume positive things about their lives together, and to
give each other the benefit of the doubt.
Here's a simple example. Olivia and Nathaniel are getting ready
to host a dinner party. Nathaniel calls, "Where are the napkins?" and
Olivia yells back edgily, "They're in the cupboard!" Because their
marriage is founded on a firm friendship, most likely he'll shrug off
her tone of voice and focus instead on the information Olivia has
given him--that the napkins are in the cupboard. He attributes her
anger to some fleeting problem that has nothing to do with him-like
she can't get the cork out of the wine bottle. However, if their
marriage were troubled, he would be more likely to sulk or yell back,
"Never mind, you get them!"
One way of looking at this positive override is similar to the "set
point" approach to weight loss. According to this popular theory, the
body has a "set" weight that it tries to maintain. Thanks to
homeostasis, no matter how much or how little you diet, your body
has a strong tendency to hover at that weight. Only by resetting your
body's metabolism (say, by exercising regularly) can dieting really
help you lose pounds for good. In a marriage, positivity and
negativity operate similarly. Once your marriage gets "set" at a certain
degree of positivity it will take far more negativity to harm your
relationship than if your "set point" were lower. And if your
relationship becomes overwhelmingly negative, it will be more
difficult to repair it.
Most marriages start off with such a high, positive set point that
it's hard for either partner to imagine their relationship derailing. But
far too often this blissful state doesn't last. Over time anger, irritation,
and resentment can build to the point that the friendship becomes
more and more of an abstraction. The couple may pay lip service to it,
but it is no longer their daily reality. Eventually they end up in
"negative sentiment override." Everything gets interpreted more and
more negatively. Words said in a neutral tone of voice are taken
personally. The wife says, "You're not supposed to run the microwave
without any food in it." The husband sees this as an attack, so he says
something like, "Don't tell me what to do. I'm the one who read the
manual!" Another battle begins.
22
Once you reach this point, getting back to the fundamental
bond that united you in the first place can seem as difficult as back
pedaling while white water rafting. But my Seven Principles will
show you how to strengthen your friendship even if you feel awash
in negativity. As you learn about these principles, you will come to
have a deeper understanding of the role of friendship in any
marriage, and you will develop the skills to retain or revive your
own.
A happy couple's secret weapon
Rediscovering or reinvigorating friendship doesn't prevent couples
from arguing. Instead, it gives them a secret weapon that prevents
quarrels from getting out of hand. For example, here's what happens
when Olivia and Nathaniel argue. As they plan to move from the city
to the suburbs, tensions between them are high. Although they see
eye to eye on which house to buy and how to decorate it, they are
locking horns over buying a new car. Olivia thinks they should join
the suburban masses and get a minivan. To Nathaniel nothing could
be drearier--he wants a Jeep. The more they talk about it, the higher
the decibel level gets. If you were a fly on the wall of their bedroom,
you would have serious doubts about their future together. Then all
of a sudden, Olivia puts her hands on her hips and, in perfect
imitation of their four-year-old son, sticks out her tongue. Since
Nathaniel knows that she's about to do this, he sticks out his tongue
first. Then they both start laughing. As always, this silly contest
defuses the tension between them.
In our research we actually have a technical name for what
Olivia and Nathaniel did. Probably unwittingly, they used a repair
attempt. This name refers to any statement or action--silly or
otherwise—that prevents negativity from escalating out of control.
Repair attempts are the secret weapon of emotionally intelligent
couples--even though many of these couples aren't aware that they
are doing something so powerful. When a couple have a strong
friendship, they naturally become experts at sending each other repair
attempts and at correctly reading those sent their way. But when
23
couples are in negative override, even a repair statement as blunt as
"Hey, I'm sorry" will have a low success rate.
The success or failure of a couple's repair attempts is one of the
primary factors in whether their marriage flourishes or flounders.
And again, what determines the success of their repair attempts is the
strength of their marital friendship. If this sounds simplistic or
obvious, you'll find in the pages ahead that it is not. Strengthening
your marital friendship isn't as basic as just being "nice." Even if you
feel that your friendship is already quite solid, you may be surprised
to find there is room to strengthen it all the more. Most of the couples
who take our workshop are relieved to hear that almost everybody
messes up during marital conflict. What matters is whether the
repairs are successful.
The purpose of marriage

In the strongest marriages, husband and wife share a deep sense of
meaning. They don't just "get along"--they also support each other's
hopes and aspirations and build a sense of purpose into their lives
together. That is really what I mean when I talk about honoring and
respecting each other.
Very often a marriage's failure to do this is what causes
husband and wife to find themselves in endless, useless rounds of
argument or to feel isolated and lonely in their marriage. After
watching countless videotapes of couples fighting, I can guarantee
you that most quarrels are really not about whether the toilet lid is up
or down or whose turn it is to take out the trash. There are deeper,
hidden issues that fuel these superficial conflicts and make them far
more intense and hurtful than they would otherwise be.
Once you understand this, you will be ready to accept one of
the most surprising truths about marriage: Most marital arguments
cannot be resolved. Couples spend year after year trying to change
each other's mind--but it can't be done. This is because most of their
disagreements are rooted in fundamental differences of lifestyle,
24
personality, or values. By fighting over these differences, they succeed
in doing, is wasting their time and harming their marriage.
This doesn't mean there's nothing you can do if your
relationship has been overrun by conflict. But it does mean that the
typical conflict-resolution advice won't help. Instead, you need to
understand the bottom-line difference that is causing the conflict
between you--and to learn how to live with it by honoring and
respecting each other. Only then will you be able to build shared
meaning and a sense of purpose into your marriage.
It used to be that couples could achieve this goal only through
their own insight, instinct, or blessed luck. But now my Seven
Principles make the secrets of marital success available to all couples.
No matter what the current state of your relationship, following these
Seven Principles can lead to dramatic, positive change. The first step
toward improving or enhancing your marriage is to understand what
happens when my Seven Principles are not followed.
This has been well documented by my extensive research into
couples who were not able to save their marriages. Learning about
the failures can prevent your marriage from making the same
mistakes--or rescue it if it already has. Once you come to understand
why some marriages fail and how the Seven Principles could prevent
such tragedies, you'll be on the way to improving your own marriage
forever.
25

2
How I Predict Divorce How I Predict Divorce
Dara and Oliver sit face to face in the Love Lab. Both are in their
late twenties, they have volunteered to take part in my study of
newlyweds. In this extensive research, 130 couples have agreed to put
their marriages not only under the microscope but in front of the
camera as well. Dara and Oliver are among the fifty who were
observed during an overnight stay at the Love Lab "apartment". My
ability to predict divorce is based in part on my analysis of these
couples and their interactions.
Dara and Oliver say their lives are hectic but happy. She attends
nursing school at night, and he works long hours as a computer
programmer. Like many couples, including those who remain content
as well as those who eventually divorce, Dara and Oliver
acknowledge that their marriage isn't perfect. But they say they love
each other and are committed to staying together. They positively
beam when they talk about the life they plan to build.
I ask them to spend fifteen minutes in the lab trying to resolve
an ongoing disagreement they are having while I videotape them. As
they speak, sensors attached to their bodies gauge their stress levels
26
based on various measurements of their circulatory system, such as
how quickly their hearts beat.
I expect that their discussion will be at least somewhat negative.
After all, I have asked them to quarrel. While some couples are
capable of resolving disagreements with understanding words and
smiles, more often there's tension. Dara and Oliver are no exception.
Dara thinks Oliver doesn't do his share of the housekeeping, and he
thinks she nags him too much, which makes him less motivated to do
more.
After listening to them talk about this problem, I sadly predict
to my colleagues that Dara and Oliver will see their marital happiness
dwindle. And sure enough, four years later they report they are on
the verge of divorce. Although they still live together, they are
leading lonely lives. They have become like ghosts, haunting the
marriage that once made them both feel so alive.
I predict their marriage will falter not because they argue--after
all, I asked them to. Anger between husband and wife doesn't itself
predict marital meltdown. Other couples in the newlywed study
argue far more during the fifteen minutes of videotaping than do
Dara and Oliver. Yet I predict that many of these couples will remain
happily married—and they do. The clues to Dara and Oliver's future
breakup are in the way they argue.
The first sign: harsh startup
The most obvious indicator that this discussion (and this
marriage) is not going to go well is the way it begins. Dara
immediately becomes negative and accusatory. When Oliver broaches
the subject of housework, she's ready to be sarcastic. "Or lack
thereof," she says. Oliver tries to lighten things up by cracking a joke:
"Or the book we were talking about writing: Men are pigs." Dara sits
pokerfaced.They talk a bit more, trying to devise a plan to make sure
Oliver does his share, and then Dara says, "I mean, I'd like to see it
resolved, but it doesn't seem like it is. I mean, I've tried making up
lists, and that doesn't work. And I've tried letting you do it on your
27
own, and nothing got done for a month." Now she's blaming Oliver.
In essence, she's saying the problem isn't the housekeeping, it's him.
When a discussion leads off this way--with criticism and or
sarcasm, a form of contempt--it has begun with a "harsh startup."
Although Dara talks to Oliver in a very soft, quiet voice, there's a load
of negative power in her words. After hearing the first minute or so of
their conversation, it's no surprise to me that by the end Dara and
Oliver haven't resolved their differences at all. The research shows
that if your discussion begins with a harsh startup, it will inevitably
end on a negative note, even if there are a lot of attempts to "make
nice" in between. Statistics tell the story: 96 percent of the time you
can predict the outcome of a conversation based on the first three
minutes of the fifteen-minute interaction! A harsh startup simply
dooms you to failure. So if you begin a discussion that way, you
might as well pull the plug, take a breather, and start over.
The second sign: the four horsemen
Dara's harsh startup sounds the warning bell that she and
Oliver may be having serious difficulty. Now, as their discussion
unfolds, I continue to look out for particular types of negative
interactions. Certain kinds of negativity, if allowed to run rampant,
are so lethal to a relationship that I call them the Four Horsemen of
the Apocalypse. Usually these four horsemen clip-clop into the heart
of a marriage in the following order: criticism, contempt,
defensiveness, and stonewalling.
Horseman 1: Criticism. You will always have some complaints
about the person you live with. But there's a world of difference
between a complaint and a criticism. A complaint only addresses the
specific action at which your spouse failed. A criticism is more
global—it adds on some negative words about your mate's character
or personality. "I'm really angry that you didn't sweep the kitchen
floor last night. We agreed that we'd take turns doing it" is a
complaint.
28
"Why are you so forgetful? I hate having to always sweep the kitchen
floor when it's your turn. You just don't care" is a criticism. A
complaint focuses on a specific behavior, but a criticism ups the ante
by throwing in blame and general character assassination. Here's a
recipe: To turn any complaint into a criticism, just add my favorite
line: "What is wrong with you?"
Usually a harsh startup comes in the guise of criticism. You can
see how quickly complaint turns into criticism when Dara begins to
talk. Listen again to what she says:
Dara: I mean, I'd like to see it resolved, but it doesn't seem like it is.
(Simple complaint) I mean, I've tried making up lists and that
doesn't work. And I've tried letting you do it on your own, and
nothing got done for a month. (Criticism. She's implying the problem
is his fault. Even if it is, blaming him will only make it worse.)
Here are some other examples that show the difference between
complaint and criticism.
Complaint. There's no gas in the car. Why didn't you fill it up like you
said you would?
Criticism. Why can't you ever remember anything? I told you a
thousand times to fill up the tank, and you didn't.
Complaint. You should have told me earlier that you're too tired to
make love. I'm really disappointed, and I feel embarrassed.
Criticism. Why are you always so selfish? It was really nasty of you to
lead me on. You should have told me earlier that you were too tired
to make love.
Complaint. You were supposed to check with me before inviting
anyone over for dinner. I wanted to spend time alone with you
tonight.
Criticism. Why do you keep putting your friends ahead of me? I
always come last on your list. We were supposed to have dinner
alone tonight.
29
If you hear echoes of yourself or your spouse in these criticisms,
you have plenty of company. The first horseman is very common in
relationships. So if you find that you and your spouse are critical of
each other, don't assume you're headed for divorce court. The
problem with criticism is that when it becomes pervasive, it paves the
way for the other, far deadlier horsemen.
Horseman 2: Contempt. Dara doesn't stop at criticizing Oliver.
Soon she's literally sneering. When he suggests that they keep a list of
his chores on the refrigerator to help him remember, she says, "Do
you think you work really well with lists?" Next, Oliver tells her that
he needs fifteen minutes to relax when he gets home before starting to
do chores."So if I leave you alone for fifteen minutes, then you think
you'll be motivated to jump up and do something?" she asks him.
"Maybe. We haven't tried it, have we?" Oliver asks.
Dara has an opportunity here to soften up, but instead she
comes back with sarcasm. "I think you do a pretty good job of coming
home and lying around or disappearing into the bathroom," she says.
And then she adds challengingly "So you think that's the cure- all, to
give you fifteen minutes?"
This sarcasm and cynicism are types of contempt. So are namecalling, eye-rolling, sneering, mockery, and hostile humor. In
whatever form, contempt--the worst of the four horsemen--is
poisonous to a relationship because it conveys disgust. It's virtually
impossible to resolve a problem when your partner is getting the
message you're disgusted with him or her. Inevitably, contempt leads
to more conflict rather than to reconciliation.
Peter, the manager of a shoe store, was a master at contempt, at
least when it came to his wife. Listen to what happens when he and
Cynthia try to discuss their disparate views about spending money.
He says, "Just look at the difference in our vehicles and our clothes. I
think that says a lot for who we are and what we value. I mean, you
tease me about washing my truck, and you go and pay to have
somebody wash your car. We're paying through the nose for your car,
and you can't be bothered to wash it. I think that's outrageous. I think
30
that's probably the most spoiled thing that you do." This is a textbook
example of contempt. He's not merely pointing out that they spend
their money differently. He is accusing his wife of a moral deficiency-
-of being spoiled.
Cynthia responds by telling him that it's physically difficult for
her to wash her car herself. Peter dismisses this explanation and
continues to take the high moral ground. "I take care of my truck
because if you take care of it, it'll last longer. I don't come from the
mentality of "Ah, just go out and buy a new one' that you seem to."
Still hoping to get Peter on her side, Cynthia says, "If you could
help me to wash my car, I'd really love that. I'd really appreciate it."
But instead of grabbing this chance at reconciliation, Peter wants to
do battle.
"How many times have you helped me wash my truck?" he
counters.
Cynthia tries again to reconcile. "I will help you wash your
truck if you will help me wash my car."
But Peter's goal is not to resolve this issue but to dress her
down. So he says, "That's not my question. How many times have
you helped me?"
"Never," says Cynthia.
"See?" says Peter. "That's where I think you have a little
responsibility, too. It's like, you know, if your dad bought you a
house, would you expect him to come over and paint it for you, too?"
"Well, will you always help me wash my car if I always help
you wash your truck?"
"I'm not sure that I'd want you to help me," Peter says, laughing.
"Well, will you always help me wash my car, then?" Cynthia
asks.
"I will help you when I can. I won't give you a blanket
guarantee for life. What are you gonna do, sue me?" asks Peter. And
he laughs again.
Listening to this discussion, it becomes clear that Peter's main
purpose is to demean his wife. His contempt comes in the guise of
assuming the high moral ground, as when he says: "I think that says a
31
lot for who we are and what we value," or "I don't come from the
mentality of 'just go out and buy a new one."
Couples who are Couples who arecontemptuous of each other are contemptuous of each other are contemptuous of each other are
more likely to suffer from infectious more likely to suffer from infectiousillnesses (colds, illnesses (colds, illnesses (colds,
flu, and so on) than other people. flu, and so on) than other people.
Contempt is fueled by long-simmering negative thoughts about
the partner. You're more likely to have such thoughts if your
differences are not resolved. No doubt, the first time Peter and
Cynthia argued about money, he wasn't so disrespectful. He probably
offered a simple complaint like "I think you should wash your own
car. It costs too much to always have someone else wash it."But as
they kept disagreeing about this, his complaints turned to global
criticisms, such as: "You always spend too much money." And when
the conflict continued, he felt more and more disgusted and fed up
with Cynthia, a change that affected what he said when they argued.
Belligerence, a close cousin to contempt, is just as deadly to a
relationship. It is a form of aggressive anger because it contains a
threat or provocation. When a wife complains that her husband
doesn't come home from work in time for dinner, a belligerent
response would be:"Well, what are you going to do about it?". When
Peter says to Cynthia, "What are you going to do, sue me?" he thinks
he's making a joke, but he's really being belligerent.
Horseman 3: Defensiveness. It's no surprise, considering how
nasty her husband is being, that Cynthia defends herself. She points
out that she doesn't get her car washed as often as he thinks. She
explains that it's more difficult physically for her to wash her car
herself than it is for him to wash his truck.
Although it's understandable that Cynthia would defend
herself, research shows that this approach rarely has the desired
effect.The attacking spouse does not back down or apologize. This is
because defensiveness is really a way of blaming your partner.
32
You're saying, in effect, "The problem isn't me, it's you."
Defensiveness just escalates the conflict, which is why it's so deadly.
When Cynthia tells Peter how hard it is for her to wash her car, he
doesn't say, "Oh, now I understand." He ignores her excuse--he
doesn't even acknowledge what she's said. He climbs farther up his
high moral ground, telling her how well he takes care of his vehicle
and implying that she's spoiled for not doing the same. Cynthia can't
win—and neither can their marriage.
Criticism, Contempt, and Defensiveness don't always gallop
into a home in strict order. They function more like a relay matchhanding the baton off to each other over and over again, if the couple
can't put a stop to it. You can see this happening as Oliver and Dara
continue their discussion about cleaning their house. Although they
seem to be seeking a solution, Dara becomes increasingly
contemptuous--mocking Oliver in the guise of questioning him and
tearing down every plan he devises. The more defensive he becomes,
the more she attacks him. Her body language signals condescension.
She speaks softly, her elbows resting on the table, her intertwined
fingers cradling her chin. Like a law professor or a judge, she peppers
him with questions just to see him squirm.
Dara: So you think that's the cure-all, to give you fifteen minutes?
(sneering)
Oliver: No, I don't think that's the cure-all. I think, combined with
writing up a list of weekly tasks that have to get done. Why not
put it on a calendar? Hey, I'll see it right then and there.
Dara: Just like when I write stuff in your Day-Timer it gets done?
(mocking him; more contempt)
Oliver: I don't always have a chance to look at my Day-Timer during
the day (defensive)
Dara: So you think you'll look at a calendar, then?
Oliver: Yeah. At any point in time, if I'm not up to speed, you should
ask me about it. But when that happens now, it's not you asking,
it's you telling me, "You haven't done this and you haven't done
that." Instead say, "Is there any reason why you haven't done this
or that?" Like, I mean, when I stayed up and did your resume that
33
one night. Stuff like that happens all the time, and you just don't
take that into account at all. (defensive)
Dara: And I don't just all of a sudden do things for you, either?
(defensive)
Oliver: No, you do. ... I think you need to relax a little bit.
Dara (sarcastic): Hmm. Well, that sounds like we solved a lot.
Obviously, Dara and Oliver have resolved nothing, thanks to
the prevalence of criticism, contempt, and defensiveness.
Horseman 4: Stonewalling. In marriages like Dara and
Oliver's, where discussions begin with a harsh startup, where
criticism and contempt lead to defensiveness, which leads to more
contempt and more defensiveness, eventually one partner tunes out.
This heralds the arrival of the fourth horseman.
Think of the husband who comes home from work, gets met
with a barrage of criticism from his wife, and hides behind the
newspaper. The less responsive he is, the more she yells. Eventually
he gets up and leaves the room. Rather than confronting his wife, he
disengages. By turning away from her, he is avoiding a fight, but he is
also avoiding his marriage. He has become a stone waller. Although
both husbands and wives can be stone wallers, this behavior is far
more common among men, for reasons we'll see later.
During a typical conversation between two people, the listener
gives all kinds of cues to the speaker that he's paying attention. He
may use eye contact, nod his head, say something like "Yeah" or "uhhuh". But a stone waller doesn't give you this sort of casual feedback.
He tends to look away or down without uttering a sound. He sits like
an impassive stone wall. The stone waller acts as though he couldn't
care less about what you're saying, if he even hears it.
Stonewalling usually arrives later in the course of a marriage
than the other three horsemen. That's why it's less common among
newlywed husbands such as Oliver than among couples who have
been in a negative spiral for a while. It takes time for the negativity
34
created by the first three horsemen to become overwhelming enough
that stonewalling becomes an understandable "out." That's the stance
that Mack takes when he and his wife Rita argue about each other's
behavior at parties. She says the problem is that he drinks too much.
He thinks the bigger problem is her reaction: She embarrasses him by
yelling at him in front of his friends. Here they are, already in the
middle of an argument:
Rita: Now I've become the problem, again. I started off with the
complaint, but now I am the problem. That always seems to
happen.
Mack: Yeah, I do that, I know. (Pause.) But your tantrums and
childishness are an embarrassment to me and my friends.
Rita: If you would control your drinking at parties, puleese . . .
Mack: (Looks down, avoids eye contact, says nothing--he's stonewalling.)
Rita: Because I think (laughs) for the most part, we get along pretty
well, really (laughs).
Mack: (Continues to stonewall. Remains silent, makes no eye contact, head
nods, facial movements, or vocalizations.)
Rita: Don't you think?
Mack: (No response.)
Rita: Mack? Hello?
The third sign: flooding
It may seem to Rita that her complaints have no effect on Mack. But
nothing could be further from the truth. Usually people stonewall as a
protection against feeling flooded. Flooding means that your spouse's
negativity--whether in the guise of criticism or contempt or even
defensiveness--is so overwhelming, and so sudden, that it leaves you
shell-shocked. You feel so defenseless against this sniper attack that
you learn to do anything to avoid a replay The more often you feel
Hooded by your spouse's criticism or contempt, the more hyper
35
vigilant you are for cues that your spouse is about to "blow" again. All
you can think about is protecting yourself from the turbulence your
spouse's onslaught causes. And the way to do that is to disengage
emotionally from the relationship. No wonder Mack and Rita are now
divorced.
Another husband, Paul, was quite up front about why he
stonewalls when his wife, Amy, gets negative. In the following
discussion he articulates what all stone wallers are feeling.
Amy: When I get mad, that's when you should step in and try to
make it better. But when you just stop talking, it means, "I no
longer care about how you feel." That just makes me feel one inch
tall. Like my opinion or feelings have absolutely no bearing on
you. And that's not the way a marriage should be.
Paul: What I'm saying is, if you wanna have a serious conversation,
you're gonna do it without yelling and screaming all the time.
You start saying things that are hurtful.
Amy: Well, when I'm hurt, mad, and I wanna hurt you, I start saying
things. And that's when we should both stop. I should say "I'm
sorry." And you should say, "I know that you wanna talk about
this. And I really should make an effort to talk instead of just
ignoring you."
Paul: I'll talk whenAmy: It fits your purpose.
Paul: No, when you're not yelling and screaming and jumping up and
down stomping.
Amy kept telling Paul how it made her feel when he shut down.
But she did not seem to hear him tell her why he shuts down: He can't
handle her hostility. This couple later divorced.
A marriage's meltdown can be predicted, then, by habitual
harsh startup and frequent flooding brought on by the relentless
presence of the four horsemen during disagreements. Although each
of these factors alone can predict a divorce, they usually coexist in an
unhappy marriage.
36
The fourth Sign: body language
Even if I could not hear the conversation between Mack the stone
waller and his wife, Rita, I would be able to predict their divorce
simply by looking at his physiological readings. When we monitor
couples for bodily changes during a tense discussion, we can see just
how physically distressing flooding is. One of the most apparent of
these physical reactions is that the heart speeds up-pounding away at
more than 100 beats per minute--even as high as 165. (In contrast, a
typical heart rate for a man who is about 30 is 76, and for a woman
the same age, 82.) Hormonal changes occur, too, including the
secretion of adrenaline, which kicks in the "fight or flight response."
Blood pressure also mounts. These changes are so dramatic that if one
partner is frequently flooded during marital discussions, it's easy to
predict that they will divorce.
Recurring episodes of flooding lead to divorce for two reasons.
First, they signal that at least one partner feels severe emotional
distress when dealing with the other. Second, the physical sensations
of feeling flooded--the increased heart rate, sweating, and so on-make
it virtually impossible to have a productive, problem-solving
discussion. When your body goes into overdrive during an argument,
it is responding to a very primitive alarm system we inherited from
our prehistoric ancestors. All those distressful reactions, like a
pounding heart and sweating, occur because on a fundamental level
your body perceives your current situation as dangerous. Even
though we live in the age of in vitro conception, organ transplants,
and gene mapping, from an evolutionary standpoint not much time
has passed since we were cave dwellers. So the human body has not
refined its fear reactions--it responds the same way, whether you're
facing a saber-toothed tiger or a contemptuous spouse demanding to
know why you can never remember to put the toilet seat back down.
When a pounding heart and all the other physical stress
reactions happen in the midst of a discussion with your mate, the
consequences are disastrous. Your ability to process information is
reduced, meaning it's harder to pay attention to what your partner is
37
saying. Creative problem solving goes out the window. You're left
with the most reflexive, least intellectually sophisticated responses in
your repertoire: to fight (act critical, contemptuous, or defensive) or
flee (stonewall). Any chance of resolving the issue is gone. Most
likely, the discussion will just worsen the situation.

Men and women really are different

In 85 percent of marriages, the stone waller is the husband. This is not
because of some lack on the man's part. The reason lies in our
evolutionary heritage. Anthropological evidence suggests that we
evolved from hominids whose lives were circumscribed by very rigid
gender roles, since these were advantageous to survival in a harsh
environment. The females specialized in nurturing children while the
males specialized in cooperative hunting.
As any nursing mother can tell you, the amount of milk you
produce is affected by how relaxed you feel, which is related to the
release of the hormone oxytocin in the brain. So natural selection
would favor a female who could quickly soothe herself and calm
down after feeling stressed. Her ability to remain composed could
enhance her children's chances of survival by optimizing the amount
of nutrition they received. But in the male natural selection would
reward the opposite response. For these early cooperative hunters,
maintaining vigilance was a key survival skill. So males whose
adrenaline kicked in quite readily and who did not calm down so
easily were more likely to survive and procreate.
To this day, the male cardiovascular system remains more
reactive than the female and slower to recover from stress. For
example, if a man and woman suddenly hear a very loud, brief
sound, like a blowout, most likely his heart will beat faster than hers
and stay accelerated for longer, according to research by Robert
Levenson, Ph.D." and his student Loren Carter at the University of
California at Berkeley The same goes for their blood pressure--his will
become more elevated and stay higher longer. Psychologist Dolf
Zillman, Ph.D." at the University of Alabama has found that when
38
male subjects are deliberately treated rudely and then told to relax for
twenty minutes, their blood pressure surges and stays elevated until
they get to retaliate. But when women face the same treatment, they
are able to calm down during those twenty minutes. (Interestingly, a
woman's blood pressure tends to rise again if she is pressured into
retaliating!) Since marital confrontation that activates vigilance takes
a greater physical toll on the male, it's no surprise that men are more
likely than women to attempt to avoid it.
It's a biological fact: Men are more It's a biological fact: Men are more
easily overwhelmed by marital easily overwhelmed by maritalconflict conflict conflict
than are their wives than are their wives
This gender difference in how physiologically reactive our
bodies are also influences what men and women tend to think about
when they experience marital stress. As part of some experiments, we
ask couples to watch themselves arguing on tape and then tell us
what they were thinking when our sensors detected they were
flooded. Their answers suggest that men have a greater tendency to
have negative thoughts that maintain their distress, while women are
more likely to think soothing thoughts that help them calm down and
be conciliatory. Men, generally, either think about how righteous and
indignant they feel ("I'm going to get even," "I don't have to take
this"), which tends to lead to contempt or belligerence. Or they think
about themselves as an innocent victim of their wife's wrath or
complaint ("Why is she always blaming me?"), which leads to
defensiveness.
Obviously these rules don't hold for every male and every
female. But after twenty-five years of research, I have noted that the
majority of couples do follow these gender differences in
physiological and psychological reactions to stress. Because of these
dissimilarities, most marriages (including healthy, happy ones) follow
a comparable pattern of conflict in which the wife, who is
constitutionally better able to handle the stress, brings up sensitive
issues.The husband, who is not as able to cope with it, will attempt to
39
avoid getting into the subject. He may become defensive and
stonewall. Or he may even become belligerent or contemptuous in an
attempt to silence her.
Just because your marriage follows this pattern, it's not a given
that a divorce is in the offing. In fact, you'll find examples of all four
horsemen and even occasional flooding in stable marriages. But when
the four horsemen take up permanent residence, when either partner
begins to feel flooded routinely, the relationship is in serious trouble.
Frequently feeling flooded leads almost inevitably to distancing
yourself from your spouse. That in turn leads you to feel lonely
without help, the couple will end up divorced or living in a dead
marriage, in which they maintain separate, parallel lives in the same
home. They may go through the motions of togetherness—attending
their children's plays, hosting dinner parties, taking family vacations.
But emotionally they no longer feel connected to each other. They
have given up.
The fifth sign: failed repair attempts

It takes time for the four horsemen and the flooding that comes in
their wake to overrun a marriage. And yet divorce can so often be
predicted by listening to a single conversation between newlyweds.
How can this be? The answer is that by analyzing any disagreement a
couple has, you get a good sense of the pattern they tend to follow. A
crucial part of that pattern is whether their repair attempts succeed or
fail. Repair attempts, as I described on page 22, are efforts the couple
makes ("Let's take a break," "Wait, I need to calm down") to deescalate
the tension during a touchy discussion--to put on the brakes so
flooding is prevented.
Repair attempts save marriages not just because they decrease
emotional tension between spouses, but because by lowering the
stress level they also prevent your heart from racing and making you
feel flooded. When the four horsemen rule a couple's communication,
40
repair attempts often don't even get noticed. Especially when you're
feeling flooded, you're not able to hear a verbal white flag.
In unhappy marriages a feedback loop develops between the
four horsemen and the failure of repair attempts. The more
contemptuous and defensive the couple is with each other, the more
flooding occurs, and the harder it is to hear and respond to a repair.
And since the repair is not heard, the contempt and defensiveness just
get heightened, making flooding more pronounced, which makes it
more difficult to hear the next repair attempt, until finally one partner
withdraws.
That's why I can predict a divorce by hearing only one
discussion between a husband and wife. The failure of repair
attempts is an accurate marker for an unhappy future. The presence
of the four horsemen alone predicts divorce with only an 82 percent
accuracy But when you add in the failure of repair attempts, the
accuracy rate reaches into the 90s. This is because some couples who
trot out the four horsemen when they argue are also successful at
repairing the harm the horsemen cause. Usually in this situation--
when the four horsemen are present but the couple's repair attempts
are successful--the result is a stable, happy marriage. In fact, 84
percent of the newlyweds who were high on the four horsemen but
repaired effectively were in stable, happy marriages six years later.
But if there are no repair attempts--or if the attempts are not able to be
heard-the marriage is in serious danger.
I can tell 96 percent of the time whether a I can tell 96 percent of the time whether a
marital discussion will marital discussion willresolve a conflict, after resolve a conflict, after resolve a conflict, after
the first three minutes of that discussion. the first three minutes of that discussion.
In emotionally intelligent marriages I hear a wide range of
successful repair attempts. Each person has his or her own approach.
Olivia and Nathaniel stick out their tongues; other couples laugh or
smile or say they're sorry. Even an irritated "Hey, stop yelling at me,"
or "You're getting off the topic" can defuse a tense situation. All such
repair attempts keep a marriage stable because they prevent the four
horsemen from moving in for good.
41
Whether a repair succeeds or fails has very little to do with how
eloquent it is and everything to do with the state of the marriage. One
happily married couple who taught me this lesson were Hal and
Jodie, Because of the nature of his research, Hal, a chemist, would
often find out at the last minute that he wouldn't be able to get home
for dinner. Although Jodie knew Hal couldn't control his hours, the
dinner situation frustrated her. When they discussed the problem in
our lab, she pointed out to him that the kids always refused to eat
dinner till he got home, so they were often having their dinner very
late, which she didn't like. So Hal suggested that she give them a
snack to tide them over. Incredulous, Jodie snapped at him: "What do
you think I have been doing all along?"
Hal realized that he had screwed up. He had displayed a
significant lack of awareness about what went on in his own home
and, worse, had insulted his wife's intelligence. In an unhappy
marriage this could easily be the grounds for some major league
sniping. I waited to see what would happen next. Since all other
evidence suggested they were happily married, I anticipated that Hal
would use some very skillfully wrought repair attempt. But Hal just
gave Jodie a really goofy smile. Jodie burst out laughing, and they
went on with their discussion.
Hal's quick grin worked because their marriage was working.
But when Oliver tried to soften up Dara by chuckling during their
conversation about housekeeping, he got nowhere. In marriages in
which the four horsemen have moved in for good, even the most
articulate, sensitive, well-targeted repair attempt is likely to fail
abysmally.
Ironically, we see more repair attempts between troubled
couples than between those whose marriages are going smoothly The
more repair attempts fail, the more these couples keep trying. It can
be poignant to hear one member of a couple offer up one repair
attempt after another, all to no avail. What makes the difference?
What predicts that repair attempts will work? Later we'll see that it is
the quality of the friendship between husband and wife and, as I
described in Chapter One, "positive sentiment override."
42
The sixth sign: bad memories

When a relationship gets subsumed in negativity, it's not only the
couple's present and future life together that are put at risk. Their past
is in danger, too. When I interview couples, I usually ask about the
history of their marriage. I have found over and over that couples
who are deeply entrenched in a negative view of their spouse and
their marriage often rewrite their past. When I ask them about their
early courtship, their wedding, their first year together, I can predict
their chances of divorce, even if I'm not privy to their current feelings.
Most couples enter marriage with high hopes and great
expectations. In a happy marriage couples tend to look back on their
early days fondly. Even if the wedding didn't go off perfectly, they
tend to remember the highlights rather than the low points. The same
goes for each other. They remember how positive they felt early on,
how excited they were when they met, and how much admiration
they had for each other. When they talk about the tough times they've
had, they glorify the struggles they've been through, drawing
strength from the adversity they weathered together.
But when a marriage is not going well, history gets rewrittenfor the worse. Now she recalls that he was thirty minutes late getting
to the ceremony. Or he focuses on all that time she spent talking to his
best man at the rehearsal dinner--or "flirting" with his friend, as it
seems to him now. Another sad sign is when you find the past
difficult to remember--it has become so unimportant or painful that
you've let it fade away.
Peter and Cynthia didn't always spend their days arguing about
car washing and other money matters. No doubt if you looked at their
photo album, you would find plenty of happy pictures from their
early days together. But those pictures have long faded from their
minds. When asked to describe the early days, they do a good job of
telling the facts of their courtship and marriage, but nothing more.
Cynthia recounts that they met at a record store where she was the
cashier. She got his name and number from his charge card receipt
43
and called him up to see if he liked the CDs he had bought. Their first
date followed.
Cynthia says that she was attracted to Peter at first because he
was going to college and was interesting to talk to and nice-looking. "I
think it was the fact that I had a charge card," Peter slips in, a snide
reference to their current fights over money He himself seems to have
a hard time remembering what attracted him to her when they first
met. He says, "Uh . . . (long pause) I honestly don't know. I never tried
to pin it down to one thing. I think for me that would be pretty
dangerous."
When they're asked about the kinds of activities they enjoyed
back then, they have a hard time remembering. "Didn't we go on
picnics or something?" Cynthia asks him, and he shrugs. The same
blank feeling is there when they discuss their decision to marry. "I
thought it would solidify the relationship. It seemed like a logical
progression--that's basically the main reason," says Peter. He recalls
that he proposed to her at a restaurant by tying the ring to a white
ribbon wrapped around a bunch of white roses. That sounds
promising, until he adds with a sad chuckle: "I'll never forget this.
She saw the ring. She started shaking a little bit, and she looked and
she asked me, I suppose you want an answer?" That's kind of not the
reaction I was looking for." He turns to his wife. "You weren't smiling
or laughing or anything when you said it--you were just deadpan,
like, "You idiot.""
"Oh nooo," Cynthia says limply.
The picture doesn't get any better. Peter had pneumonia and a
temperature of 103 at their wedding. His main memory other than
feeling sick, was being in the limo afterward with Cynthia and his
best man. His friend turned on the stereo, and the Motley Crue song
"Same Old Ball and Chain" came blasting out. Cynthia remembers
feeling hurt because many guests left right after dinner. Peter recalls
that everyone kept banging on their glasses with spoons to make him
and Cynthia kiss."I was getting really annoyed," he recalls. To sum up
their wedding day, he says, "It was your basic tragedy" Cynthia
smiles wanly in agreement.
44
The reason Peter and Cynthia have such distorted memories is
that the negativity between them has become so intense, it's as if it's
cast in stone. When the four horsemen overrun a home, impairing the
communication, the negativity mushrooms to such a degree that
everything a spouse does--or ever did--is recast in a negative light.
In a happy marriage, if the husband promises to pick up the
wife's dry cleaning but forgets, she is likely to think, "Oh well, he's
been under a lot of stress lately and needs more sleep." She considers
his lapse to be fleeting and caused by a specific situation. In an
unhappy marriage the same circumstance is likely to lead to a
thought like "He's just always so inconsiderate and selfish." By the
same token, in a happy marriage a loving gesture, like a wife greeting
her husband with a passionate kiss at the end of the workday, is seen
as a sign that the spouse is loving and considerate. But in an unhappy
marriage the same action will lead the husband to think, "What does
she want out of me?"
This distorted perception explains why one husband we
studied, Mitch, saw ulterior motives whenever his wife, Leslie,
bought him a gift, hugged him, or even called him on the phone. Over
time he had rewritten his view of their marriage, creating a very
negative script. Whenever a conflict arose, he was all set to feel selfrighteous and indignant. His negative thoughts about Leslie helped
maintain his distress. He'd get flooded as soon as they had a
confrontation. Negative expectations of her and their relationship
became the norm. Eventually they divorced.
The end draws near
When a marriage gets to the point where the couple have
rewritten their history, when their minds and bodies make it virtually
impossible to communicate and repair their current problems, it is
almost bound to fail. They find themselves constantly on red alert.
Because they always expect to do combat, the marriage becomes a
torment.
The understandable result: They withdraw from the
relationship.
45
Sometimes a couple at this end stage of marriage will come for
counseling. On the surface it may seem like nothing much is wrong.
They don't argue or act contemptuous or stonewall. They don't do
much of anything. They talk calmly and distantly about their
relationship and their conflicts. An inexperienced therapist could
easily assume that their problems don't run very deep. But actually
one or both of them has already disengaged emotionally from the
marriage.
Some people leave a marriage literally, by divorcing. Others do
so by leading parallel lives together. Whichever the route, there are
four final stages that signal the death knell of a relationship.
1. You see your marital problems as severe.
2. Talking things over seems useless. You try to solve problems
on your own.
3. You start leading parallel lives.
4. Loneliness sets in.
When a couple gets to the last stage, one or both partners may
have an affair. But an affair is usually a symptom of a dying marriage,
not the cause. The end of that marriage could have been predicted
long before either spouse strayed. Too often, couples begin to seek
help for their marriage after they've already hit troubled waters. The
warning signs were almost always there early on if they had known
what to look for. You can see the seeds of trouble in (1) What couples
actually say to each other (the prevalence of harsh startup, the four
horsemen, and the unwillingness to accept influence), (2) The failure
of their repair attempts, (3) Physiological reactions (flooding), or (4)
Pervasive negative thoughts about their marriage. Any of these signs
suggests that emotional separation, and in most cases divorce, may
only be a matter of time.
But it's not over till it's over
As bleak as this sounds, I am convinced that far more marriages
could be saved than currently are. Even a marriage that is about to hit
46
bottom can be revived with the right kind of help. Sadly, most
marriages at this stage get the wrong kind. Well-meaning therapists
will deluge the couple with advice about negotiating their differences
and improving their communication. At one time I would have done
the same. At first, when I figured out how to predict divorce, I
thought I had found the key to saving marriages. All that was
necessary, I presumed, was to teach people how to argue without
being overridden by the four horsemen and without getting flooded.
Then their repair attempts would succeed, and they could work out
their differences.
But like so many experts before me, I was wrong. I was not able
to crack the code to saving marriages until I started to analyze what
went right in happy marriages. After intensely studying happily
married couples for as long as sixteen years, I now know that the key
to reviving or divorce-proofing a relationship is not in how you
handle disagreements but in how you are with each other when
you're not fighting. So although my Seven Principles will also guide
you in coping with conflict, the foundation of my approach is to
strengthen the friendship that is at the heart of any marriage.
47

3
Principle Principle1:
Enhance Your Love Maps Enhance Your Love Maps
Rory was a pediatrician who ran an intensive care unit for
babies. He was beloved at the hospital, where everybody called him
Dr. Rory. He was a reserved man but capable of great warmth,
humor, and charm. He was also a workaholic who slept in the
hospital an average of twenty nights a month. He didn't know the
names of his children's friends, or even the name of the family dog.
When he was asked where the back door to the house was, he turned
to ask his wife, Lisa.
His wife was upset with how little she saw of Rory and how
emotionally unconnected to her he seemed to be. She frequently tried
to make little gestures to show him she cared, but her attempts just
annoyed him. She was left with the sense that he simply didn't value
her or their marriage.
To this day I'm struck by the story of this couple. Here was an
intellectually gifted man who didn't even know the name of the
family dog or how to find the back door! Of the many problems their
relationship faced, perhaps the most fundamental was Rory's
shocking lack of knowledge about his home life. He had become so
48
caught up in his work that little space was left over in his brain for the
basics of his wife's world.
As bizarre as Rory's rampant ignorance may sound, I have
found that many married couples fall into a similar (if less dramatic)
habit of inattention to the details of their spouse's life. One or both
partners may have only the sketchiest sense of the other's joys, likes,
dislikes, fears, stresses. The husband may love modern art, but his
wife couldn't tell you why or who his favorite artist is. He doesn't
remember the names of her friends or the co worker she fears is
constantly trying to undermine her.
In contrast, emotionally intelligent couples are intimately
familiar with each other's world. I call this having a richly detailed
love map--my term for that part of your brain where you store all the
relevant information about your partner's life. Another way of saying
this is that these couples have made plenty of cognitive room for their
marriage. They remember the major events in each other's history,
and they keep updating their information as the facts and feelings of
their spouse's world change. When she orders him a salad, she knows
to ask for his dressing on the side. If she works late, he'll tape her
favorite TV show because he knows which one it is and when it's on.
He could tell you how she's feeling about her boss, and exactly how
to get to her office from the elevator. He knows that religion is
important to her but that deep down she has doubts. She knows that
he fears being too much like his father and considers himself a "free
spirit." They know each other's goals in life, each other's worries, each
other's hopes.
Without such a love map, you can't really know your spouse.
And if you don't really know someone, how can you truly love them?
No wonder the biblical term for sexual love is to "know."
In knowledge there is strength

From knowledge springs not only love but the fortitude to weather
marital storms. Couples who have detailed love maps of each other's
world are far better prepared to cope with stressful events and
49
conflict. Take, for example, one of the major causes of marital
dissatisfaction and divorce: the birth of the first baby. Sixty-seven
percent of couples in our newlywed study underwent a precipitous
drop in marital satisfaction the first time they became parents. But the
remaining 33 percent did not experience this drop—in fact, about half
of them saw their marriages improve.
What separated these two groups? You guessed it: The couples
whose marriages thrived after the birth had detailed love maps from
the get-go, according to a study of fifty couples by my student Alyson
Shapiro. These love maps protected their marriages in the wake of
this dramatic upheaval. Because husband and wife were already in
the habit of keeping up to date and were intently aware of what each
other was feeling and thinking, they weren't thrown off course. But if
you don't start off with a deep knowledge of each other, it's easy for
your marriage to lose its way when your lives shift so suddenly and
dramatically.
Maggie and Ken knew each other only a short time when they
married and decided to have a family But what their relationship
lacked in longevity they made up for in intimacy They were in touch
not just with the outlines of each other's lives--their favorite hobbies,
sports, and so on--but with each other's deepest longings, beliefs, and
fears. No matter how busy they were, they made each other their
priority—always making sure they had time to catch up on each
other's day. And at least once a week they'd go out for dinner and just
talk—sometimes about politics, sometimes about the weather,
sometimes about their own marriage.
When their daughter Alice was born, Maggie decided to give up
her job as a computer scientist to stay home with the baby. She herself
was surprised by the decision since she had always been very driven
in her career. But when she became a mother, her fundamental sense
of meaning in life changed. She found she was willing to undergo
great sacrifices for Alice's sake. Now she wanted the savings they had
earmarked for a motorboat to go into a college fund.
What happened to Maggie happens to many new mothers--the
experience of parenthood is so profound that your whole notion of
who you are and what you value gets reshuffled.
50
At first, Ken was confused by the changes in his wife. The
woman he thought he knew was transforming before his eyes. But
because they were in the habit of staying deeply connected, Ken was
able to keep up to date on what Maggie was thinking and feeling. Too
often when a new baby comes, the husband gets left behind. (More on
this and ways of dealing with it in Chapter 9.) He can't keep up with
his wife's metamorphosis, which he may not understand or be happy
about. Knowing Maggie had always been a priority to Ken, so he
didn't do what too many new fathers do--he didn't back away from
this new charmed circle of mother and child. As a result they went
through the transformation to parenthood together, without losing
sight of each other or their marriage.
Having a baby is just one life event that can cause couples to
lose their way without a detailed love map. Any major change-from a
job shift to a move to illness or retirement--can have the same effect.
Just the passage of time can do it as well. The more you know and
understand about each other, the easier it is to keep connected as life
swirls around you.
Love Maps Questionnaire
By giving honest answers to the following questions, you will get a
sense of the quality of your current love maps. For the most accurate
reading of how your marriage is doing on this first principle, both of
you should complete the following.
Read each statement and circle T for "true" or F for "false."
1. I can name my partner's best friends. T F
2. I can tell you what stresses my partner is currently facing. T F
3. I know the names of some of the people who have been irritating
my partner lately. T F
4. I can tell you some of my partner's life dreams. T F
5. I am very familiar with my partner's religious beliefs and ideas. TF
6. I can tell you about my partner's basic philosophy of life. T F
51
7. I can list the relatives my partner likes the least. T F
8. I know my partner's favorite music. T F
9. I can list my partner's three favorite movies, T F
10. My spouse is familiar with my current stresses. T F
11. Know the three most special times in my partner's life. T F
12. I can tell you the most stressful thing that happened to my partner
as a child. T F
13. I can list my partner's major aspirations and hopes in life. T F
14. I know my partner's major current worries. T F
15. My spouse knows who my friends are. T F
16. I know what my partner would want to do if he or she suddenly
won the lottery. T F
17. I can tell you in detail my first impressions of my partner. T F
18. Periodically I ask my partner about his or her world right now. TF
19. I feel that my partner knows me pretty well. T F
20. My spouse is familiar with my hopes and aspirations. T F
Scoring: Give yourself one point for each "true" answer.
10 or above: This is an area of strength for your marriage. You have a
fairly detailed map of your spouse's everyday life, hopes, fears, and
dreams. You know what makes your spouse "tick." Based on your
score you'll probably find the love map exercises that follow easy and
gratifying. They will serve as a reminder of how connected you and
your partner are. Try not to take for granted this knowledge and
understanding of each other. Keeping in touch in this way ensures
you'll be well equipped to handle any problem areas that crop up in
your relationship,
Below 10: Your marriage could stand some improvement in this area.
Perhaps you never had the time or the tools to really get to know each
other. Or perhaps your love maps have become outdated as your
lives have changed over the years. In either case, by taking the time to
learn more about your spouse now, you'll find your relationship
becomes stronger.
There are few gifts a couple can give each other greater than the
joy that comes from feeling known and understood. Getting to know
each other shouldn't be a chore. That's why the first love map exercise
52
below is actually a game! While you're having fun playing, you'll also
be expanding and deepening your knowledge of each other. By the
time you complete all of the exercises in this chapter, you'll know
there's truth in that old song "To Know You Is to Love You."
Exercise 1: The Love Map
20 Questions game
Play this game together in the spirit of laughter and gentle fun. The
more you play, the more you'll learn about the love maps concept and
how to apply it to your own relationship.
Step 1. Each of you should take a piece of paper and pen or
pencil. Together, randomly decide on twenty numbers between 1 and
60. Write the numbers down in a column on the left-hand side of your
paper.
Step 2. Below is a list of numbered questions. Beginning with
the top of your column, match the numbers you chose with the
corresponding question. Each of you should ask your partner this
question. If your spouse answers correctly (you be the judge), he or
she receives the number of points indicated for that question, and you
receive one point. If your spouse answers incorrectly, neither of you
receives any points. The same rules apply when you answer. The
winner is the person with the higher score after you've both answered
all twenty questions.
1. Name my two closest friends. (2)
2. What is my favorite musical group, composer, or instrument?(2)
3. What was I wearing when we first met?(2)
4. Name one of my hobbies.(3)
5. Where was I born?(1)
6. What stress am I facing right now?(4)
7. Describe in detail what I did today, or yesterday.(4)
8. When is my birthday? (1)
9. What is the date of our anniversary?(1)
10. Who is my favorite relative?(2)
53
11. What is my fondest unrealized dream?(5)
12. What is my favorite flower?(2)
13. What is one of my greatest fears or disaster scenarios?(3)
14. What is my favorite time of day for lovemaking?(3)
15. What makes me feel most competent?(4)
16. What turns me on sexually?(3)
17. What is my favorite meal?(2)
18. What is my favorite way to spend an evening?(2)
19. What is my favorite color?(1)
20. What personal improvements do I want to make in my life?(4)
21. What kind of present would I like best?(2)
22. What was one of my best childhood experiences?(2)
23. What was my favorite vacation?(2)
24. What is one of my favorite ways to be soothed?(4)
25. Who is my greatest source of support (other than you)?(3)
26. What is my favorite sport?(2)
27. What do I most like to do with time off?(2)
28. What is one of my favorite weekend activities?(2)
29. What is my favorite getaway place?(3)
30. What is my favorite movie?(2)
31. What are some of the important events coming up in my life? How do
I feel about them?(4)
32. What are some of my favorite ways to work out?(2)
33. Who was my best friend in childhood?(3)
34. What is one of my favorite magazines?(2)
35. Name one of my major rivals or "enemies."(3)
36. What would I consider my ideal job?(4)
37. What do I fear the most?(4)
38. Who is my least favorite relative?(3)
39. What is my favorite holiday?(2)
40. What kinds of books do I most like to read?(3)
41. What is my favorite TV show?(2)
42. Which side of the bed do I prefer?(2)
43. What am I most sad about?(4)
44. Name one of my concerns or worries.(4)
45. What medical problems do I worry about?(2)
54
46. What was my most embarrassing moment?(3)
47. What was my worst childhood experience?(3)
48. Name two of the people I most admire.(4)
49. Name my major rival or enemy.(3)
50. Of all the people we both know, who do I like the least?(3)
51. What is one of my favorite desserts?(2)
52. What is my social security number?(2)
53. Name one of my favorite novels.(2)
54. What is my favorite restaurant?(2)
55. What are two of my aspirations, hopes, wishes?(4)
56. Do I have a secret ambition? What is it?(4)
57. What foods do I hate?(2)
58. What is my favorite animal?(2)
59. What is my favorite song?(2)
60. Which sports team is my favorite?(2)
Play this game as frequently as you'd like. The more you play,
the more you'll come to understand the concept of a love map and the
kind of information yours should include about your spouse.
Exercise 2: Make Your Own Love Maps
Now that you have a clearer understanding of the love maps
concept, it's time to focus more seriously on your love maps for each
other's everyday lives. Even though these maps are "all in your head,"
it helps to write down some of the basics. Spend extra time on this
exercise if you (or your spouse) believes that your current love map is
inadequate or, as is often the case, has fallen out of date. Use the
following form to interview each other as if you were reporters. (If
your spouse is unavailable, you can fill out this form without his or
her input, but obviously the major benefits of this exercise come from
sharing information.) Take turns as listener and speaker, and write
out the answers to these forms. (It's best to use a separate piece of
paper, or better yet a notebook or journal that you can use for all of
the exercises in this book.) Don't pass judgment on what your spouse
tells you or try to give each other advice. Remember that you are
55
simply on a fact-finding mission. Your goal is to listen and learn
about your mate.
The cast of characters in my partner's life
Friends:
Potential friends:
Rivals, competitors, "enemies":
Recent important events in my partner's life
Upcoming events
(What is my partner looking forward to? Dreading?)
My partner's current stresses
My partner's current worries
My partner's hopes and aspirations (For self? For others?)
56
Although this exercise offers you just a snapshot of your
partner's life, it can be quite illuminating. Couples who have
completed our workshop say this exercise offered them plenty of
surprises that helped them better understand their spouse. Joe, for
example, never realized just how deeply Donna longed to be an
author and how frustrated she was in her banking job until he asked
her point-blank about her hopes and aspirations. And she never
realized that his recent irritability was rooted in his concern about his
new boss and his job performance, not her mother's visit.
This love maps form is useful for creating a broad outline of
your current lives. But love maps shouldn't just be broad--they should
also be deep. The next exercise will ensure that yours are.
Exercise 3: Who Am I?
The more you know about each other's inner world, the more
profound and rewarding your relationship will be. This questionnaire
is designed both to guide you through some self-exploration and to
help you share this exploration with your partner. Work on this
exercise even if you and your spouse consider yourselves open books.
There's always more to know about each other. Life changes us, so
neither of you may be the same person who spoke those wedding
vows five, ten, or fifty years ago.
Many of the questions in this exercise are powerful. Please
make sure you have enough time and privacy to do them justice. In
fact, it may be best to reserve this exercise for an uninterrupted
stretch when you do not have work to do, deadlines to meet, phone
calls to answer, or children (or anybody else) to look after. Most likely
you won't be able to complete this questionnaire in one sitting, nor
should you try. Instead, break it up by section and do it slowly, over
time together.
Answer the questions in each section as candidly as you can.
You don't have to answer every aspect of each question--just respond
to the parts that are relevant to your life. Write your answers in your
private journal or notebook. If writing so much is hard, you can do it
in outline form--but the process of writing this down is important to
the success of the exercise. When you're ready, exchange notebooks
57
and share with each other what you have written. Discuss each
other's entries and what this added knowledge implies for your
marriage and the deepening of your friendship.
My triumphs and Strivings
1. What has happened in your life that you are particularly
proud of? Write about your psychological triumphs, times when
things went even better than you expected, periods when you came
through trials and tribulations even better off. Include periods of
stress and duress that you survived and mastered, small events that
may still be of great importance to you, events from your childhood
or the recent past, self-created challenges you met, periods when you
felt powerful, glories and victories, wonderful friendships you
maintained, and so on.
2. How have these successes shaped your life? How have they
affected the way you think of yourself and your capabilities? How
have they affected your goals and the things you strive for?
3. What role has pride (that is, feeling proud, being praised,
expressing praise for others) played in your life? Did your parents
show you that they were proud of you when you were a child? How?
How have other people responded to your accomplishments?
4. Did your parents show you that they loved you? How? Was
affection readily expressed in your family? If not, what are the effects
and implications of this for your marriage?
5. What role does pride in your accomplishments play in your
marriage? What role do your own strivings have in your marriage?
What do you want your partner to know and understand about these
aspects of yourself, your past, present, and plans for the future? How
do you show pride in one another?
My Injuries and Healings
1. What difficult events or periods have you gone through?
Write about any significant psychological insults and injuries you
have sustained, your losses, disappointments, trials, and tribulations.
Include periods of stress and duress, as well as any quieter periods of
despair, hopelessness, and loneliness.
58
Also include any deep traumas you have undergone as a child
or adult. For example, harmful relationships, humiliating events, even
molestation, abuse, rape, or torture.
2. How have you survived these traumas? What are their lasting
effects on you?
3. How did you strengthen and heal yourself? How did you
redress your grievances? How did you revive and restore yourself?
4. How did you gird and protect yourself against this ever
happening again?
5. How do these injuries and the ways you protect and heal
yourself affect your marriage today? What do you want your partner
to know and understand about these aspects of yourself?
My Emotional World
1. How did your family express the following when you were a
child: Anger Sadness Fear Affection Interest in one another
2. During your childhood, did your family have to cope with a
particular emotional problem, such as aggression between parents, a
depressed parent, or a parent who was somewhat emotionally
wounded? What implications does this have for your marriage and
your other close relationships (friendships, relationships with your
parents, your siblings, your children)?
3. What is your own philosophy about expressing feelings,
particularly sadness, anger, fear, pride, and love? Are any of these
difficult for you to express or to see expressed by your spouse? What
is the basis of your perspective on this?
4. What differences exist between you and your spouse in the
area of expressing emotion? What is behind these differences? What
are the implications of these differences for you?
59
My Mission ans Legacy
1. Imagine that you are standing in a graveyard looking at your
own tombstone. Now write the epitaph you would like to see there.
Begin with the words: "Here lies..."
2. Write your own obituary. (It does not have to be brief.) How
do you want people to think of your life, to remember you?
3. Now you're ready to write a mission statement for your own
life. What is the purpose of your life? What is its meaning? What are
you trying to accomplish? What is your larger struggle?
4. What legacy would you like to leave when you die?
5. What significant goals have you yet to realize? This can be
creating something, or having a particular experience, Minor
examples are learning to play the banjo, climbing a mountain, and so
on.
Who J Want to Become
Take a moment now to reflect on what you have just written. We are
all involved in becoming the person we most want to be. In that
struggle we all have demons to fight and overcome.
1. Describe the person you want to become,
2. How can you best help yourself become that person?
3. What struggles have you already faced in trying to become
that person?
4. What demons in yourself have you had to fight? Or still have
to fight?
5. What would you most like to change about yourself?
6. What dreams have you denied yourself or failed to develop?
7. What do you want your life to be like in five years?
8. What is the story of the kind of person you would like to be?
The next step
All of the above exercises and questions will help you develop greater
personal insight and a more detailed map of each other's life and
60
world. Getting to know your spouse better and sharing your inner
self with your partner is an ongoing process. In fact, it's a lifelong
process. So expect to return to these pages from time to time to
update your knowledge about yourselves and each other. Think
about questions to ask your partner, like "If you could add an
addition to our home what would it be?" or "How are you feeling
about your job these days?" One therapist I know has taken to
wearing a Bugs Bunny pin and advising couples that the key to
sustaining a happy marriage is to ask periodically, "What's up, doc?"
But love maps are only a first step. Happily married couples
don't "just" know each other. They build on and enhance this
knowledge in many important ways. For starters, they use their love
maps to express not only their understanding of each other but their
fondness and admiration as well, the basis of my second principle.
61
4
Principle 2: Principle 2:
Nurture Your Fondness Nurture Your Fondness
and Admiration and Admiration
Remember Dr. Rory, the husband whose love map was the size of a
postage stamp? Who didn't even know the name of the family dog?
For years his wife Lisa put up with his workaholism. But a turning
point in their relationship occurred one year on Christmas Day, when
Rory was, of course, working. Lisa decided to pack a Christmas
picnic and bring the kids and herself to the hospital.
As they ate together in the waiting room, Rory turned on Lisa,
his face like an angry mask. He told her he resented being surprised
with a picnic."Why did you do this? It is really embarrassing. None of
the other doctors' wives would do this." Suddenly a resident called
him on the waiting room phone. As Rory picked up the receiver, his
face softened and his voice became helpful, warm, and friendly.
When he hung up, he turned back to Lisa, his face again full of anger.
Something snapped inside Lisa. She had had it. Clearly her husband
was capable of kindness--but not toward her. She packed up the
picnic and took the kids home.
Soon afterward she began going out in the evenings without
him. After a while Rory asked her for a divorce. But in a last-ditch
62
effort to work out their differences, they decided to try marital
counseling. At first they got nowhere. When Lisa tried to be
conciliatory toward Rory during their first session with a marital
therapist, he was unable to respond in kind to her repair attempts.
But their marriage's hidden hope was discovered when the
couple agreed to be taped in my lab for a segment of Face to Face
with Connie Chung. The interviewer asked Rory and Lisa about their
early years together. As Rory began to recall their first date, his face
lit up. He explained that Lisa, unlike him, came from a traditional
Armenian home. She was very sheltered by her parents and very
inexperienced when it came to dating. Rory knew that getting her and
her family to accept him would take a long time, but he was willing to
hang in there. Here's a little of what they recalled:
Rory: I think she was very nervous, and I had some background
about why she was nervous, some cultural things that she was
trying to live with. And because of this I knew this was going to
take a long, long time. So I wasn't nervous at all. I figured this
was stage one of a five-year marathon. . . .
Lisa: You mean you had a five-year plan on our first date?
Rory: Maybe that's exaggerating, but I knew it would take more than
one lunch.
Lisa: Wow.
Rory and Lisa actually held hands while they discussed this.
Lisa was beaming--he had never before recounted his campaign to
win her heart. This little vignette may not sound very dramatic (in
fact, the TV show edited Rory and Lisa down to a snippet of air time),
but to a trained observer there was much in this couple's interaction
that offered hope for their marriage. Rory and Lisa's fond memories
of their early days were evidence that underneath their mutual
antagonism there were still glimmerings of what I call a fondness and
admiration system. This means that they each retained some
fundamental sense that the other was worthy of being respected and
even liked.
63
If a couple still has a functioning fondness and admiration
system, their marriage is salvageable. I'm not suggesting that the road
to reviving a marriage as troubled as Rory and Lisa's is easy But it can
be done. By using techniques like those you'll find in the pages ahead,
Rory and Lisa's therapist, Lois Abrams, showed them that they could
unearth those positive feelings even more and put them to work to
save their marriage.
Two years later everything has changed for this couple. Rory
has revised his work schedule. He trained a resident to do much of
the hospital work that he had been doing singlehandedly He now eats
dinner every night with Lisa and the children. He and Lisa also go out
together in the evenings, especially to folk dance. Despite the agony
they put each other through, Rory and Lisa saved their marriage.
Fondness and admiration are two of the most crucial elements
in a rewarding and long-lasting romance. Although happily married
couples may feel driven to distraction at times by their partner's
personality flaws, they still feel that the person they married is
worthy of honor and respect. When this sense is completely missing
from a marriage, the relationship cannot be revived.
Learning from history
As it was with Rory and Lisa, the best test of whether a couple still
has a functioning fondness and admiration system is usually how
they view their past. If your marriage is now in deep trouble, you're
not likely to elicit much praise on each other's behalf by asking about
the current state of affairs. But by focusing on your past, you can
often detect embers of positive feelings.
Of course, some marriages do come up empty. In these
relationships the antagonism has metastasized like a virulent cancer,
even going backward in time and destroying the couple's positive
memories. We saw that sad result in the marriage of Peter and
Cynthia, who argued over washing her car. Their relationship was
ruined by his contempt and her defensiveness. When they were asked
64
the same questions about their early years, it became clear that their
love was gone. They could remember very little about the beginning
of their relationship. When asked what they used to do when they
were dating, they gave each other a brief "help me out here" glance
and then sat silently, racking their brains for an answer. Peter couldn't
remember a single thing he admired about Cynthia back then. Their
marriage was not salvageable.
I've found 94 percent of the time that couples
who put a positive spin on their marriage's history
are likely to have a happy future as well. When
happy memories are distorted, it's a sign
that the marriage needs help.
In contrast, when another couple in my newlywed study,
Michael and Justine, were asked about their history, they glowed.
Their wedding was "perfect," the honeymoon was "fabulous." What's
telling isn't just that they feel positive about their early years, but how
vivid their memories are. Justine recalls that they had gone to the
same high school, he a few years ahead of her. He was a big sports
hero. She had such a crush on him that she had clipped his picture
from the newspaper and kept it in a scrapbook. (She confessed and
showed him the scrapbook on their fourth date.) They met formally a
few years later, when she tagged along with his foster sister (a friend
of hers) who was going to visit him at college for the weekend.
Michael sensed right away that Justine was the one, but he
worried that she wouldn't like him. She recounts with a giggle
discovering the letter he slipped under her leather purse at the end of
that weekend to let her know how he felt about her."I was never very
aggressive about chasing women," he says. "She was the first girl I
ever actually pursued. That's how I knew something was different
about this one."
They recall the long walks and talks they had, the letters they
wrote every day while he was at school. The only bad part of those
days, says Michael, was "being away from Justine. Just missing her a
lot."You can hear Justine's fondness, pride, and admiration for
65
Michael when she says, "I thought, "God, if I don't marry this guy,
someone else will. I'd better get him while I can."" Michael says, "I
would look at other girls, and I didn't want to be with them. I just
wanted to be with her. I wanted to become a legal couple and let
everybody know how special she is to me. "Justine recalls the unity
they felt in dealing with one of his buddies who resented that Justine
was taking so much of Michael's time. "He didn't get it that I was
giving her my time," Michael says.
It won't come as much of a surprise to hear that Michael and
Justine continue to be happily married. That's because having a
fundamentally positive view of your spouse and your marriage is a
powerful buffer when bad times hit. Because they have this reserve of
good feeling, Justine and Michael will not have cataclysmic thoughts
about separation and divorce each time they have an argument.
The antidote to contempt
At first, this may all seem obvious to the point of being
ridiculous: People who are happily married like eachother. If they
didn't, they wouldn't be happily married. But fondness and
admiration can be fragile unless you remain aware of how crucial
they are to the friendship that is at the core of any good marriage. By
simply reminding yourself of your spouse's positive qualities--even as
you grapple with each other's flaws--you can prevent a happy
marriage from deteriorating. The simple reason is that fondness and
admiration are antidotes for contempt. If you maintain a sense of
respect for your spouse, you are less likely to act disgusted with him
or her when you disagree. So fondness and admiration prevent the
couple from being trounced by the four horsemen.
If your mutual fondness and admiration have been completely
extinguished, your marriage is in dire trouble. Without the
fundamental belief that your spouse is worthy of honor and respect,
where is the basis for any kind of rewarding relationship? But there
are many couples like Rory and Lisa, whose fondness and admiration
have receded to barely detectable levels. Although it seems that the
66
fire is out, some embers still burn. Fanning them is the crucial first
step in salvaging such a marriage.
Fondness and Admiration Questionnaire
To assess the current state of your fondness and admiration system,
answer the following:
Read each statement and circle T for "true" or F for "false."
1. I can easily list the three things I most admire about my partner. T F
2. When we are apart, I often think fondly of my partner. T F
3. I will often find some way to tell my partner "I love you." T F
4. I often touch or kiss my partner affectionately. T F
5. My partner really respects me. T F
6. I feel loved and cared for in this relationship. T F
7. I feel accepted and liked by my partner. T F
8. My partner finds me sexy and attractive. T F
9. My partner turns me on sexually. T F
10. There is fire and passion in this relationship. T F
11. Romance is definitely still a part of our relationship. T F
12. I am really proud of my partner. T F
13. My partner really enjoys my achievements and accomplishments.TF
14. I can easily tell you why I married my partner. T F
15. If I had it all to do over again, I would marry the same person. T F
16. We rarely go to sleep without some show of love or affection. T F
17. When I come into a room, my partner is glad to see me. T F
18. My partner appreciates the things I do in this marriage. T F
19. My spouse generally likes my personality. T F
20. Our sex life is generally satisfying. T F
Scoring: Give yourself one point for each "true" answer.
10 or above: This is an area of strength for your marriage. Because
you value each other highly, you have a shield that can protect your
relationship from being overwhelmed by any negativity that also
exists between you. Although it might seem obvious to you that
people who are in love have have a high regard for each other, it's
67
common for spouses to lose sight of some of their fondness and
admiration over time. Remember that this fondness and admiration is
a gift worth cherishing. Completing the exercises in this chapter from
time to time will help you to reaffirm your positive feelings for each
other.
Below 10: Your marriage could stand some improvement in this area.
Don't be discouraged by a low score. There are many couples in
whom the fondness and admiration system has not died but is buried
under layers of negativity, hurt feelings, and betrayal. By reviving the
positive feelings that still lie deep below, you can vastly improve your
marriage.
If your fondness and admiration are being chipped away, the
route to bringing them back always begins with realizing how
valuable they are. They are crucial to the long-term happiness of a
relationship because they prevent contempt--one of the marriagekilling four horsemen—from becoming an overwhelming presence in
your life. Contempt is a corrosive that, over time, breaks down the
bond between husband and wife. The better in touch you are with
your deep-seated positive feelings for each other, the less likely you
are to act contemptuous of your spouse when you have a difference
of opinion.
Facing the flames
There's nothing complicated about reviving or enhancing your
fondness and admiration. Even positive feelings that have long been
buried can be exhumed simply by thinking and talking about them.
You can do this by meditating a bit on your partner and what makes
you cherish him or her. If you're feeling out of practice or have too
much stress or anger to do this "free form," the following exercises
will guide you. As simple as these exercises may seem to be, they
have enormous power. When you acknowledge and openly discuss
positive aspects of your partner and your marriage, your bond is
strengthened. This makes it much easier to address the problem areas
in your marriage and make some positive changes. Feel free to do
68
these exercises as often as you wish. They are not intended only for
troubled relationships. If your marriage is stable and happy, working
through these exercises is an excellent way to heighten the romance.
Exercise 1: “I Appreciate…”
From the list below, circle three items that you think are characteristic
of your partner. If there are more than three, still circle just three.
(You can circle another three if you choose to do this exercise again.)
If you're having difficulty coming up with three, feel free to define the
word characteristic very loosely Even if you can recall only one
instance when your partner displayed this characteristic, you can
circle it.
1. Loving
2. Sensitive
3. Brave
4. Intelligent
5. Thoughtful
6. Generous
7. Loyal
8. Truthful
9. Strong
10. Energetic
11. Sexy
12. Decisive
13. Creative
14. Imaginative
15. Fun
16. Attractive
17. Interesting
18. Supportive
19. Funny
20. Considerate
21. Affectionate
22. Organized
23. Resourceful
24. Athletic
25. Cheerful
26. Coordinated
27. Graceful
28. Elegant
29. Gracious
30. Playful
31. Caring
32. A great friend
33. Exciting
34. Thrifty
35. Full of plans
36. Shy
37. Vulnerable
38. Committed
39. Involved
40. Expressive
41. Active
42. Careful
43. Reserved
44. Adventurous
69
45. Receptive
46. Reliable
47. Responsible
48. Dependable
49. Nurturing
50. Warm
51. Virile
52. Kind
53. Gentle
54. Practical
55. Lusty
56. Witty
57. Relaxed
58.Beautiful
59. Handsome
60. Rich
61. Calm
62. Lively
63. A great partner
64. A great parent
65. Assertive
66. Protective
67. Sweet
68. Tender
69. Powerful
70. Flexible
71. Understanding
72. Totally silly
For each item you checked, briefly think of an actual incident
that illustrates this characteristic of your partner.Write the
characteristic and the incident in your notebook or journal as follows:

1. Characteristic ______________________________
 Incident ___________________________________
2. Characteristic ______________________________
 Incident ___________________________________
3. Characteristic ______________________________
 Incident ___________________________________
Now, share your list with your partner. Let him or her know what it
is about these traits that you value so highly.
In my workshops, I can see the positive benefits of this exercise
immediately.The room is filled with warm smiles and laughter.
Couples who began the session sitting stiffly and awkwardly
suddenly seem relaxed. Just looking at them, you can tell that
something they had lost is being regained. The sense of hope that
their marriage can be saved is almost palpable.
70
Exercise 2:The History and
Philosophy of Your Marriage
Most couples are helped all the more by talking about the happy
events of their past. Below is a version of the questionnaire that led
Rory and Lisa to reconnect with their fondness and admiration for
each other. Completing this questionnaire together will bring you
face to face, once again, with the early years of your relationship, and
help you remember how and why you became a couple.
You will need a few hours of uninterrupted time to complete
this exercise. You can ask a close friend or relative to serve as
interviewer, or you can just read the questions and talk about them
together. There are no right or wrong answers to these questions--
they are merely meant to guide you in recalling the love and
perspective on marriage that led you to join your lives in the first
place.
Part One: The History of Your Relathionship
1. Discuss how the two of you met and got together. Was there
anything about your spouse that made him or her stand out? What were
your first impressions of each other?
2. What do you remember most about the time you were first
dating? What stands out? How long did you know each other before you
got married? What do you remember of this period? What were some of
the highlights? Some of the tensions? What types of things did you do
together?
3. Talk about how you decided to get married. Of all the people in
the world, what led you to decide that this was the person you wanted to
marry? Was it an easy decision? Was it a difficult decision? Were you in
love? Talk about this time,
4. Do you remember your wedding? Talk to each other about your
memories. Did you have a honeymoon? What do you remember about it?
5. What do you remember about the first year you were married?
Were there any adjustments you needed to make?
6. What about the transition to becoming parents? Talk to each other
about this period of your marriage. What was it like for the two of you?
71
7. Looking back over the years, what moments stand out as the
really happy times in your marriage? What is a good time for you as a
couple? Has this changed over the years?
8. Many relationships go through periods of ups and downs. Would
you say that this is true of your marriage? Can you describe some of these
periods?
9. Looking back over the years, what moments stand out as the
really hard times in your marriage? Why do you think you stayed
together? How did you get through these difficult times?
10. Have you stopped doing things together that once gave you
pleasure? Explore these with one another.
Part Two: YourPhilosophy of Marriage
11. Talk to each other about why you think some marriages work
while others don't. Decide together who among the couples you know
have particularly good marriages and who have particularly bad
marriages. What is different about these two marriages? How would you
compare your own marriage to each of these couples'?
12. Talk to each other about your parents' marriages. Would you say
they were very similar to or different from your own marriage?
13. Make a chart of the history of your marriage, its major turning
points, ups and downs. What were the happiest times for you? For your
partner? How has your marriage changed over the years?
Most couples find that recalling their past together recharges
their relationship in the here and now. Answering these questions
often reminds couples of the love and great expectations that inspired
their decision to marry in the first place. This can give couples who
thought their marriage was already over the glimmerings of hope
that lead them to struggle on to save their relationship. Just repeating
the two exercises above from time to time may be enough to salvage
and strengthen your fondness and admiration for each other. But if
the negativity is deeply entrenched, a marriage may require a longerterm, more structured approach, which you'll find in the next
exercise.
72
Exercise 3: A Seven Week Course
Fondness and Admiration
This exercise is designed to get you into the habit of thinking
positively about your partner when you're apart. If you are angry,
stressed, or feeling distant from your spouse, you may tend to focus
on his or her negative characteristics. This leads to distressmaintaining thoughts, which in turn leave you feeling ever more
distant and isolated in your marriage. This exercise counteracts that
tendency by training you to focus your thoughts on your partner's
positive characteristics, even if you aren't having such a great day
together.
For each day below there is a positive statement, or thought,
followed by a task. Think about each statement and say it to yourself
many times throughout the day while you and your spouse are apart.
In some cases the thought may not seem to apply to your spouse or
your marriage, especially if your fondness and admiration have
dimmed. Keep in mind that the statement does not have to describe
the typical state of affairs between you at the present time. If you can
think of a single instant or episode where the statement applied,
focus on that memory. For example, if you're not feeling overly
attracted to your spouse these days, focus on one area of his or her
anatomy that does appeal to you. Also be sure to complete the simple
task that follows each positive statement. Do the exercise each day,
no matter how you happen to be feeling about your relationship or
your spouse. Don't stop even if you just had a major blow-up or are
feeling very distant from each other.
Although this exercise might sound silly or hokey, it is based
on a wide body of research into the power of rehearsing positive
thoughts. This approach is one of the tenets of cognitive therapy,
which has proven highly successful in helping people overcome
depression. When people fall into a depression, their thinking may
become disordered--they see everything in an extremely negative
light, which just adds to their sense of hopelessness. But if, overtime,
they deliberately accustom their mind to a different, positive way of
thinking, the sense of hopelessness can be lifted.
73
This exercise is an experiment in offering the same hope to
marriage. What you're really doing is rehearsing a more positive way
to think about your partner and your relationship. Like any rehearsal,
if you do it often enough, the words (and more importantly, the
thoughts) will become second nature.
Note: Since most couples spend time apart on Monday through
Friday, those are the days that are specified in the schedule below.
You can switch the actual days around to better fit your schedule (if,
for example, you work on the weekends), as long as you do the
exercise five days a week.
Week 1
Monday
 Thought: I am genuinely fond of my partner.
Task: List one characteristic you find endearing or lovable.
Tuesday
Thought: I can easily speak of the good times in our marriage.
Task: Pick one good time and write a sentence about it.
Wednesday
Thought: I can easily remember romantic, special times in our
marriage.
Task: Pick one such time and think about it.
Thursday
Thought: I am physically attracted to my partner.
Task: Think of one physical attribute you like.
Friday
Thought: My partner has specific qualities that make me proud.
Task: Write down one characteristic that makes you proud.
Week 2
Monday
Thought: I feel a genuine sense of "we" as opposed to "I" in this
marriage.
Task: Think of one thing that you both have in common.
Tuesday
Thought: We have the same general beliefs and values.
Task: Describe one belief you share.
74
Wednesday
Thought: We have common goals.
Task: List one such goal.
Thursday
Thought: My spouse is my best friend.
Task: What secret about you does your spouse know?
Friday
Thought: I get lots of support in this marriage.
Task: Think of a time when your spouse was very supportive of you.
Week3
Monday
Thought: My home is a place to come to get support and reduce
stress,
Task: List o time when your spouse helped you reduce stress.
Tuesday
Thought: I can easily recall the time we first met.
Task: Describe that first meeting on paper.
Wednesday
Thought: I remember many details about deciding to get married,
Task: Write one sentence describing what you remember.
Thursday
Thought: I can recall our wedding and honeymoon.
Task: Describe one thing about them you enjoyed.
Friday
Thought: We divide up household chores in a fair way.
Task: Describe one way you do this on a regular basis. If you do not
do your share, decide on a chore you will take on (such as doing
the laundry).
Week 4
Monday
Thought: We are able to plan well and have a sense of control over
our : lives together.
Task: Describe one thing you both planned together.
75
Tuesday
Thought: I am proud of this marriage.
Task: List two things about this marriage that you are you proud of.
Wednesday
Thought: I am proud of my family.
Task: Recall a specific time when you especially felt this pride.
Thursday
Thought: I don't like things about my partner, but I can live with
them.
Task: What is one of these minor faults you have adapted to?
Friday
Thought: This marriage is a lot better than most I have seen.
Task: Think of a marriage you know that s awful.
Week 5
Monday
Thought: was really lucky to meet my spouse.
Task: List one benefit that being married to your spouse offers.
Tuesday
Thought: Marriage is sometimes a struggle, but it's worth it.
Task: Think of one difficult time you successfully weathered
together.
Wednesday
Thought: There is a lot of affection between us.
Task: Plan a surprise gift for your mate for tonight.
Thursday
Thought: We are genuinely interested in one another.
Task: Think of something to do or talk about that would be
interesting.
Friday
Thought: We find one another to be good companions.
Task: Plan an outing together.
Week 6
Monday
Thought: There is lots of good loving in my marriage.
Task: Think of a special trip you took together.
76
Tuesday
Thought: My partner is an interesting person.
Task: Plan something to ask your mate about that interests both of
you.
Wednesday
Thought: We respond well to each other.
Task: Write o love letter to your spouse and mail it.
Thursday
Thought: If I had it to do over again, I would marry the same
person.
Task: Plan an anniversary (or other) getaway.
Friday
Thought: There is lots of mutual respect in my marriage.
Task: Consider taking a class together (sailing, ballroom dancing,
etc.). Or tell your spouse about a time recent/y when you admired
something your spouse did.
Week 7
Monday
Thought: Sex is usually (or can be) quite satisfying in this marriage.
Task: Pan an erotic evening for the two of you,
Tuesday
Thought: We have come a long way together.
Task: Think ofo// you have accomplished as a team.
Wednesday
Thought: I think we can weather any storm together.
Task: Reminisce about having made it through a hard time.
Thursday
Thought: We enjoy each other's sense of humor.
Task: Rent o comedy video to watch together.
Friday
Thought: My mate can be very cute.
Task: Get very dressed up for an elegant evening together. Or if you
don't like that kind of thing, plan another kind of evening out you
would enjoy.
77
By the end of the seven weeks, you're likely to find that your
perspective on your partner and your marriage is far sunnier. Singing
each other's praises can only benefit your marriage. But in order to
ensure that the gains continue, you need to put your respect and
affection to work. In the next chapter you'll do just that, by using
them as the foundation for revamping--or reviving—your marriage's
sense of romance.
78
















79
5
Principle 3: Principle 3:
Turn toward Each Other Turn toward Each Other
Instead of Away Instead of Away

None of the footage taped in our Love Lab would win anybody
an Oscar. Our archives are filled if with scenes in which the husband
looks out the picture window and says, "Wow, look at that boat," and
the wife peers over her magazine and says, "Yeah, it looks like that
big schooner we saw last summer, remember?" and the husband
grunts.
You might think I'd find viewing hour after hour of such scenes
unbearably boring. On the contrary: When couples engage in lots of
chitchat like this, I can be pretty sure that they will stay happily
married. What's really happening in these brief exchanges is that the
husband and wife are connecting--they are turning toward each
other. In couples who go on to divorce or live together unhappily,
such small moments of connection are rare. More often the wife
doesn't even look up from her magazine--and if she does, her
husband doesn't acknowledge what she says.
Hollywood has dramatically distorted our notions of romance
and what makes passion burn. Watching Humphrey Bogart gather
teary-eyed Ingrid Bergman into his arms may make your heart
80
pound, but real-life romance is fueled by a far more humdrum
approach to staying connected. It is kept alive each time you let your
spouse know he or she is valued during the grind of everyday life.
Comical as it may sound, romance actually grows when a couple are
in the supermarket and the wife says, "Are we out of bleach?" and the
husband says, "I don't know. Let me go get some just in case," instead
of shrugging apathetically. It grows when you know your spouse is
having a bad day at work and you take sixty seconds out of your
own workday to leave words of encouragement on his voice mail. It
grows when your wife tells you one morning, "I had the worst
nightmare last night," and you say, "I'm in a big hurry, but tell me
about it now so we can talk about it tonight," instead of "I don't have
time." In all of these instances husband and wife are making a choice
to turn toward each other rather than away In marriage people
periodically make what I call "bids" for their partner's attention,
affection, humor, or support. People either turn toward one another
after these bids or they turn away. Turning toward is the basis of
emotional connection, romance, passion, and a good sex life.
So in the Love Lab my favorite scenes are the very ones that
any Hollywood film editor would relegate to the cutting room floor. I
know there's deep drama in the little moments: Will they read the
Sunday paper together or silently alone? Will they chat while they eat
lunch? Watching them is suspenseful because I know: Couples who
turn toward each other remain emotionally engaged and stay
married. Those that don't eventually lose their way.
The reason for the differing outcome of these marriages is what
I've come to call the couple's emotional bank account. Partners who
characteristically turn toward each other rather than away are
putting money in the bank. They are building up emotional savings
that can serve as a cushion when times get rough, when they're faced
with a major life stress or conflict. Because they have stored up all of
this goodwill, they are better able to make allowances for each other
when a conflict arises. They can maintain a positive sense of each
other and their marriage even during hard times.
81
The biggest payoff from this emotional bank account isn't the
cushion it offers when the couple are stressed. As I said, turning
toward your spouse in the little ways is also the key to long-lasting
romance. Many people think that the secret to reconnecting with their
partner is a candlelit dinner or a by-the-sea vacation. But the real
secret is to turn toward each other in little ways every day. A
romantic night out really turns up the heat only when a couple has
kept the pilot light burning by staying in touch in the little ways. It's
easy to imagine Justine and Michael, the couple who recalled their
wedding and courtship with such delight, at a candlelit restaurant.
But sit Peter and Cynthia, the couple who couldn't agree on car
washing or much of anything else, in the same chairs, and the
evening would most likely be a fiasco, filled with accusations,
recriminations, or awkward silences.
Is your Marriage Primed for Romance?
To get a good sense of how your relationship is faring (or is
likely to fare in the future) in the romance department, answer the
following questions.
Read each statement and circle T for "true" or F for "false."
1. We enjoy doing small things together (folding laundry, watching TV) T
F
2. I look forward to spending my free time with my partner. T F
3. At the end of the day my partner is glad to see me. T F
4. My partner is usually interested in hearing my views. T F
5. I really enjoy discussing things with my partner. T F
6. My partner is one of my best friends. T F
7. I think my partner would consider me a very close friend. T F
8. We just love talking to each other. T F
9. When we go out together, the time goes very quickly. T F
10. We always have a lot to say to each other, T F
11. We have a lot of fun together. T F
12. We are spiritually very compatible. T F
82
13. We tend to share the same basic values. T F
14. We like to spend time together in similar ways. T F
15. We really have a lot of common interests. T F
16. We have many of the same dreams and goals. T F
17. We like to do a lot of the same things. T F
18. Even though our interests are somewhat different, I enjoy my partner's
interests. T F
19. Whatever we do together, we usually tend to have a good time, T F
20. My partner tells me when he or she has had a bad day. T F
Scoring: Give yourself one point for each "true" answer.
10 or above: Congratulations! This is an area of strength in your
marriage. Because you are so often "there" for each other during the
minor events in your lives, you have built up a hefty emotional bank
account that will support you over any rough patches in your
marriage (and keep many at bay). It's those little moments that you
rarely think about—when you're shopping at the supermarket,
folding laundry, or having a quickie catch up call while you're both
still at work--that make up the heart and soul of a marriage. Having a
surplus in your emotional bank account is what makes romance last
and gets you through hard times, bad moods, and major life changes.
Below 10: Your marriage could stand some improvement in this area.
By learning to turn toward each other more during the minor
moments in your day, you will make your marriage not only more
stable but more romantic. Every time you make the effort to listen
and respond to what your spouse says, to help him or her, you make
your marriage a little better.
Couples often ignore each other's emotional Couples often ignore each other's emotional
needs out of mindlessness, not malice. needs out of mindlessness, not malice.
The first step in turning toward each other more is simply to be
aware of how crucial these mundane moments are, not only to your
marriage's stability, but to its ongoing sense of romance. For many
couples, just realizing that they shouldn't take their everyday
interactions for granted makes an enormous difference in their
relationship, Remind yourself that being helpful to each other will do
far more for the strength and passion of your marriage than a two-
83
week Bahamas getaway.The following exercises will also help you
make turning toward each other an easy, natural part of your lives
together.
Exercise 1: Keep Emotional bank account
Keeping an account in your head of how much you're
connecting with your spouse emotionally in little ways can greatly
benefit your marriage. But for some couples the concept works best if
they make their emotional bank account "real."You can do this by
drawing a simple ledger and giving yourself one point each time
you've turned toward your spouse during the course of the day. You
probably wouldn't want to document every encouraging nod you
gave while your spouse was talking. But you would include entries
for such events as "Called J at work to see how meeting went" and
"Took his van to car wash."
Be careful not to turn this into a competition or a quid pro quo
where you track each other's account "balance" and keep tabs on who
has done what for whom. That approach defeats the purpose of this
exercise. The goal is to focus on what you can do to improve your
marriage--not on what your spouse should be doing but isn't. That
means, for example, trying to turn toward your spouse even when
you feel he or she is being difficult or hostile.
You can tally your daily or weekly balance by adding up your
deposits and subtracting any withdrawals ("Forgot to get film for M's
camera," "Was late getting home"). For this exercise to work it's
important to be ruthlessly honest with yourself when you are
negligent and turn away from your spouse. The more in the black
your account is, the more likely you are to see your marriage
improve. Don't be surprised if positive changes don't occur
overnight, however. If you've gotten out of the habit of turning
toward each other, it may take some time to see the benefits of this
exercise. One of the challenges is to notice when your partner does
turn toward you and vice versa. In one research study in which
couples were closely observed in their own homes, happily married
couples noticed almost all of the positive things the researchers
84
observed their partners do for them. However, unhappily married
couples underestimated their partners' loving intentions by 50
percent!
Although you don't want your ledgers to become the focus of a
competition, it makes sense to get each other's input about which
areas of your lives could benefit most from more emotional
connection. That way you can focus your efforts on where they'll
have the greatest impact. Below is a long list of activities that some
couples do together--everything from washing dishes to going
bowling. Choose the three that you most wish your partner would do
with you. You can also circle an item if you and your spouse already
do it jointly but you wish you did so more frequently or that your
spouse was more "there" emotionally during the activity. For
example, if you currently read the newspaper together every
morning but wish your spouse would discuss the news with you
more instead of just reading silently, you can circle that item.
1. Reunite at the end of the day and talk about how it went.
2. Shop for groceries. Make up the shopping list.
3. Cook dinner, bake.
4. Clean house, do laundry.
5. Shop together for gifts or clothes (for self, kids, or friends),
6. Go out (no kids) for brunch or dinner, or to your favorite haunt or bar.
7. Read the morning paper together.
8. Help each other with a self-improvement plan (e.g." a new class, weight
loss, exercise, a new career).
9. Plan and host a dinner party.
10. Call and or think about each other during the workday.
11. Stay overnight at a romantic hideaway.
12. Eat breakfast together during the work week.
13. Go to a church, mosque, or synagogue together.
14. Do yard work, shovel the walk, do home repairs, car maintenance, and
washing.
15. Perform committee work in the community (e.g." volunteering).
16. Exercise together.
17. Go on weekend outings (e.g." picnic, drives).
18. Spend "everyday" time with kids-bedtimes, baths, homework.
19. Take the kids on outings (e.g." zoo, museum, dinner).
85
20. Attend school functions (e.g." teacher conferences),
21. Stay in touch with/ spend time with kin (parents, in-laws, siblings).
22. Entertain out-of-town guests.
23. Travel together (plane, bus, train, car), 24. Watch TV or videos.
25. Order take out.
26. Double-date with friends.
27. Attend sporting events.
28. Engage in a favorite activity (e.g." bowl, go to amusement park, bicycle,
hike, jog, horseback ride, camp, canoe, sail, water-ski, swim).
29. Talk or read together by an open fire.
30. Listen to music,
31. Go dancing or attend a concert, nightclub, jazz club, or theater.
32. Host your child's birthday party.
33. Take your child to lessons.
34. Attend your child's sporting events or performance (recital, play, etc.).
35. Pay bills.
36. Write letters or cards.
37. Deal with family medical events (take kids to the doctor, dentist, or
emergency room).
38. Work at home, but still be together in some way.
39. Go to a community event (e.g." church auction).
40. Go to a party.
41. Drive to or from work together.
42. Celebrate milestones in your children's lives (confirmation, graduation).
43. Celebrate other milestones in your lives (e.g." promotion, retirement).
44. Play computer games, surf the Internet.
45. Supervise your children's play dates.
46. Plan vacations.
47. Plan your future together. Dream.
48. Walk the dog.
49. Read out loud together, 50. Play a board game or a card game.
51. Put on plays or skits together, do errands together on a weekend.
86
53. Engage in hobbies; e.g." painting, sculpting, making music.
54. Talk over drinks (alcohol, coffee, or tea).
55. Find time to just talk without interruptions--find time for spouse to really
listen to you.
56. Philosophize.
57. Gossip (talk about other people).
58. Attend a funeral.
59. Help out other people.
60. Hunt for a new house or apartment.
61. Test-drive new cars.
62. Other_______________.
Now, share your top three choices with each other so you both
know how best to turn toward each other and accrue points.
Warning: Sometimes this exercise generates conflict when we do it as
part of our workshop. For example, Dick may say he wants Renee to
be there more when it comes to making weekend plans, but Renee
claims she already does most of the weekend planning. To avoid this,
remember that this exercise is really a way to flatter each other. What
you're really telling your spouse is "I love you so much that I want
more of you," So be sure to talk about your requests in that spirit.
Rather than being critical of what your partner has not done in the
past, focus on what you would like to have happen now.
That means saying "I'd like it if you stayed with me most of the time
at parties" instead of "You always abandon me."
The real benefit of this exercise comes when you both look at
the three items your partner chose and follow through by committing
to do one of them. This should be a firm agreement--in the
workshops we actually call it a contract. Some couples find it helpful
to put these contracts in writing, such as "I, Wendy, agree to join Bill
in walking the dog every Monday and Thursday." This may sound
stiff and formal, but an official agreement usually has the opposite
effect: because it conveys respect for your request, you feel relieved
and excited that your spouse is willing to give this to you. No
wonder this exercise intensifies the sense of romance!
87
Exercise 2: The Stress-Reducing
Conversation
Although you can earn points in your emotional bank account during
just about any everyday activity listed above, we have found the first
one, "Reunite at the end of the day and talk about how it went," to be
the most effective. What this "How was your day, dear?"
conversation does (or ought to do) is to help each of you manage the
stress in your life that is not caused by your marriage. Learning to do
this is crucial to a marriage's long term health, according to research
by my colleague Neil Jacob son, Ph.D., of the University of
Washington. He has found that one of the key variables in relapse
after his own approach to marital therapy is whether stress from
other areas of your lives spills over into your relationship. Couples
who are overrun by this stress see their marriages relapse, while
those who can help each other cope with it keep their marriages
strong.
Many couples automatically have this sort of calming-down
conversation, perhaps at the dinner table or after the kids fall asleep.
But too often this discussion does not have the desired effect--it
increases your stress levels because you end up feeling frustrated
with your spouse for not listening to you, whether you're the one
venting or the one who's offering advice. If that's the case, you need
to change your approach to these catch up conversations to make
sure they help you calm down.
For starters, think about the timing of the chat. Some people
want to unburden themselves when they're barely through the door.
But others need to decompress on their own for a while before they're
ready to interact. So wait until you both want to talk.
On a typical day, spend twenty to thirty minutes on this
conversation. The cardinal rule is that you talk about whatever is on
your mind outside of your marriage. This is not the time to discuss
any conflicts between you. It's an opportunity to support each other
emotionally concerning other areas in your lives.
This exercise takes active listening, that classic technique of
standard marital therapy, and stands it on its head. The goal of active
listening is to hear your spouse's perspective with empathy and
without judging him or her. That's all well and good. But this
88
approach usually fails because couples are asked to use it when they
are airing their gripes with each other. This is difficult to do and often
about as painless as an IRS audit. It's virtually impossible not to feel
frightened, hurt, or mad as hell when your spouse is blasting you.
But I have found that this same listening technique can be
extremely beneficial if you use it during discussions where you are
not your spouse's target. In this context, you'll feel far freer to be
readily supportive and understanding of your spouse and vice versa.
This can only heighten the love and trust you feel. Here are detailed
instructions for having this discussion:
1.Take turns. Each partner gets to be the complainer for fifteen
minutes.
2. Don't give unsolicited advice. If you quickly suggest a
solution to your partner's dilemma, he or she is likely to feel that you
are trivializing or dismissing the problem, which backfires. In effect
you're saying, "That's not such a big issue. Why don't you just. ..?" So
the cardinal rule when helping your partner de-stress is that
understanding must precede odwce. You have to let your partner
know that you fully understand and empathize with the dilemma
before you suggest a solution. Often times your spouse isn't asking
you to come up with a solution at all--just to be a good listener, or
offer a ready shoulder to cry on.
I have found a significant gender difference when it comes to
this rule. Women are more sensitive to advice-giving than are men. In
other words, when a wife tells her husband her troubles, she usually
reacts very negatively if he tries to give her advice right away Instead
she wants to hear that he understands and feels compassion. Men are
far more tolerant of immediate attempts to problem-solve, so a wife
can probably "get away" with some gentle words of wisdom. Still, a
man who emotes to his wife about his work troubles would probably
prefer that she offer him sympathy rather than a solution.
In the workshops, when I tell couples that their role is not to
solve each other's problems but to offer support, their relief is almost
palpable. Men especially get caught up in thinking that when their
wives are upset, their role is to take care of the problem. A huge
burden is lifted once they realize that this is not their responsibility
and is usually the opposite of what their wives want. It seems almost
89
too good to be true that you earn points by not trying to solve your
partner's problems, but that is the case.
3. Show genuine interest. Don't let your mind or eyes wander.
Stay focused on your spouse. Ask questions. Make eye contact. Nod,
say "uh-huh," and so on.
4. Communicate your understanding. Let your spouse know
that you empathize: "What a bummer! Id be stressed out, too. I can
see why you feel that way."
5. Take your spouse's side. This means being supportive, even
if you think his or her perspective is unreasonable. Don't side with
the opposition--this will make your spouse resentful or dejected. If
your wife's boss chewed her out for being five minutes late, don't say,
"Oh, well, maybe Bob was just having a bad day," And certainly don't
say, "Well, you shouldn't have been late." Instead, say "That's so
unfair!" The point isn't to be dishonest. It's just that timing is
everything. When your partner comes to you for emotional support
(rather than for advice), your job is not to cast moral judgment or to
tell him or her what to do. Your job is to say "poor baby"
6. Express a "we against others" attitude. If your mate is
feeling all alone in facing some difficulty, express solidarity. Let him
or her know that the two of you are in this together.
7. Express affection. Hold your mate, put an arm on his or her
shoulder, say "I love you."
8. Validate emotions. Let your partner know that his or her
feelings make sense to you. Phrases that do this include "Yeah, that is
really so sad. That would have me worried, too. I can see why you'd
be annoyed about that."
Here are two brief examples of a stress-reducing conversation
to give you an idea of what to do--and what not to.
Don’t:
Hank: I had another terrible meeting with Ethel today. She keeps
challenging my knowledge, and she has been going to the boss
telling him that she doubts my competence. I hate her.
90
Wanda: I think this is another example of you Hying off the handle
and overreacting.(Criticizing)I have seen her be very constructive
and reasonable. Maybe you are just not being sensitive to her
concerns. (Siding with the enemy)
Hank: The woman is out to get me.
Wanda: That's your paranoid streak coming out. You've got to try to
control that. (Criticizing)
Hank: Oh, forget it.
Hank: I had another terrible meeting with Ethel today She keeps
challenging my knowledge, and she has been going to the boss
telling him that she doubts my competence. I hate her.
Wanda: I can't believe that woman! She is the meanest fighter and a
terrible gossip. (We against others) What did you say? (Showing
genuine interest)
Hank: I told her she is just out to get me. And that she's not going to
succeed.
Wanda: She can make anyone become paranoid. I'm sorry she's
putting you through this. (Expressing affection) I'd like to get even
with her. (We against others) hank: So would I, but I think it'd be
better to just forget it. Just ignore her.
Wanda: Your boss knows what she's like. Everyone does.
Hank: That's true. He doesn't share her opinions of me, and she goes
around saying everyone is incompetent but her.
Wanda: That's bound to backfire.
Hank: I hope so, or she'll give me an ulcer.
Wanda: This is really stressing you out! I can understand why
(Validating emotions) you know, she's given her husband one.
Hank: He has an ulcer?
Wanda: I just heard about it.
Hank: Good Lord!
Below are some sample scenarios to help you practice being
supportive during your spouse's whining session.
91
1.Your wife's sister yelled at her for not yet repaying money she
loaned her two months ago. Your wife is feeling outraged and hurt
by her sister's attitude. (She does owe her sister the money.)
You say:
2.Your husband got a speeding ticket on his way home. "It was a
speed trap!" he yells. "Everyone was going 80 mph. Why do I have
to be the one who gets pulled over?"
You say:
3.Your wife was late getting to a big job interview. Now she's worried
she won't get the job. "I can't believe how stupid I was," she moans.
You say:
4.Your husband asked his boss for a raise and was turned down. He
got angry and stormed out of his boss's office. Now he's worried
that his boss will hold this against him.
You say:
Sample Answers:
1. "I'm sorry she made you feel really hurt and angry." (Or "Poor baby")
2. "How outrageous! That's so unfair!" (Or "Poor baby")
3. "You weren't stupid. That could happen to anybody." (Or "Poor baby.")
4. "I understand how you feel," (Or "Poor baby.")
One last note: No one knows you better than your spouse. Sometimes
advice may be just what you're looking for. The best strategy is to
talk about what you'd each like from the other when you're feeling
stressed. If your spouse is ranting about the promotion he didn't get,
you can say something like "You're obviously really upset about this.
How can I help you? Do you need me just to listen, or do you want
me to help you brainstorm what to do next?"
If you have this sort of conversation every day, it can't help but
benefit your marriage. You'll come away with the conviction that
92
your partner is on your side, and that's one of the foundations of a
long-lasting friendship.
Once your marriage gets set at a more positive leve Once your marriage gets set at a more positive level,
it will be harder to knock it off course. it will be harder to knock it off course.
As beneficial as turning toward each other can be, it can feel
hurtful and rejecting when your spouse does the opposite. Often
couples turn away from each other not out of malice but out of
mindlessness. They get distracted and start taking each other for
granted. Realizing the importance of the little moments and paying
more attention to them is enough to solve the problem in many cases.
But sometimes there are deeper reasons why couples keep missing
each other. For example, when one partner rebuffs the other, it could
be a sign of hostility over some festering conflict. But I have found
that when one spouse regularly feels the other just doesn't connect
enough, often the cause is a disparity between their respective needs
for intimacy and independence.
Marriage is something of a dance. There are times when you
feel drawn to your loved one and times when you feel the need to
pull back and replenish your sense of autonomy. There's a wide
spectrum of "normal" needs in this area--some people have a greater
and more frequent need for connection, others for independence.
A marriage can work even if people fall on opposite ends of this
spectrum--as long as they are able to understand the reason for their
feelings and respect their differences. If they don't, however, hurt
feelings are likely to develop.
If you feel like your spouse gives you the cold shoulder in little
ways throughout the day, or if your spouse's concept of closeness
feels more like suffocation to you, the best thing you can do for your
marriage is to talk it out. Looking at these moments together will give
you greater insight into each other and help you both learn how to
give each other what you need.
93
Exercise 3: What to Do When Your
Spouse Doesn’t Turn toward You
If one of you is feeling rebuffed by the other lately, or overwhelmed
by your spouse's need for closeness, you should both fill out the form
below and then share your answers. There is no answer key for these
questions, they are merely a point of departure for discussions with
your spouse. The bottom line of this approach is that there isn't one
reality when a couple misses each other in little ways. There are two
equally legitimate perspectives.
Once you understand and acknowledge this, you'll find that
reconnecting just comes naturally.
During this week I felt:
1. Defensive A Great Deal Definitely a little Not at all
2. Hurt A Great Deal Definitely a little Not at all
3. Angry A Great Deal Definitely a little Not at all
4. Sad A Great Deal Definitely a little Not at all
5. Misunderstood A Great Deal Definitely a little Not at all
6. Criticized A Great Deal Definitely a little Not at all
7. Worried A Great Deal Definitely a little Not at all
8. Righteously A Great Deal Definitely a little Not at all
indignant
9. Unappreciated A Great Deal Definitely a little Not at all
10. Unattractive A Great Deal Definitely a little Not at all
11. Disgusted A Great Deal Definitely a little Not at all
12. Disapproving A Great Deal Definitely a little Not at all
13. Like leaving A Great Deal Definitely a little Not at all
14. Like my opinions A Great Deal Definitely a little Not at all
didn't matter
15. I had no idea A Great Deal Definitely a little Not at all
what I was feeling
16. Lonely A Great Deal Definitely a little Not at all
94
What triggered these feelings?
1. I felt excluded A Great Deal Definitely a little Not at all
2. I was not A Great Deal Definitely a little Not at all
important to
my spouse
3. I felt cold toward A Great Deal Definitely a little Not at all
my spouse
4. I definitely felt A Great Deal Definitely a little Not at all
rejected
5. I was criticized A Great Deal Definitely a little Not at all
6. I felt no affection A Great Deal Definitely a little Not at all
toward my
partner
7. I felt that my A Great Deal Definitely a little Not at all
partner was not
attracted to me
8. My sense of A Great Deal Definitely a little Not at all
dignity was being
compromised.
9. My partner A Great Deal Definitely a little Not at all
was being
domineering.
10.I could not A Great Deal Definitely a little Not at all
persuade my
partner at all.
Now that you know what triggered this episode, it's time to see
whether your emotional reaction is rooted in your past. Look over
your answers to the "Who Am I?" exercise on p. 56. See if you can
find connections there between earlier traumas or behavior and the
current situation.Use the following checklist to facilitate this search
for links between the past and present.
95
These recent feelings about my marriage come from:
(check all that apply)
_ The way I was treated in my family growing up
_ A previous relationship
_ Past injuries, hard times, or traumas I've suffered
_ My basic fears and insecurities
_ Things and events have not yet resolved or put aside
_ Unrealized hopes I have
_ Ways other people treated me in the past
_ Things I have always thought about myself
_ Old "nightmares" or "catastrophes" I have worried about
After you've read each other's answers above, you will, I hope,
come to see that many of your differences are really not matters of
"fact." We are all complicated creatures whose actions and reactions
are governed by a wide array of perceptions, thoughts, feelings, and
memories. In other words, reality is subjective, which is why your
partner's perspective on the past week may be different from yours
without either of you being right or wrong about what really
happened. In your notebook, write out a short description of your
point of view, and then do the same for your partner's perspective.
 It's natural to make the fundamental error of assuming that
distance and loneliness are all your partner's fault. In truth they're
nobody's fault. In order to break the pattern, you both need to admit
playing some roe (however slight at first) in creating the problem. To
do that, read the following list and circle all that apply to you and
that may have contributed to the turning away or the feelings of
being swamped and smothered recently.
(Do not try to do this until you have calmed down physiologically.
Follow the steps for self-soothing on page 176 and then let go of
thoughts that maintain the distress, thoughts of feeling
misunderstood, righteous indignation, or innocent victimhood.)
96
1. I have been very stressed and Yes Definitely Maybe A little
irritable
2. I have not expressed much Yes Definitely Maybe A little
 appreciation toward my spouse
3. I have been overly sensitive Yes Definitely Maybe A little
4. I have been overly critical Yes Definitely Maybe A little
5. I have not shared very much Yes Definitely Maybe A little
 of my inner world
6. I have been depressed Yes Definitely Maybe A little
7. I would say that I have a chip on YesDefinitely Maybe A little
 my shoulder
8. I have not been very affectionate Yes Definitely Maybe A little
9. Have not been a very good YesDefinitely Maybe A little
listener
10. I have been feeling a bit like Yes Definitely Maybe A little
a martyr
Overall, my contribution to this mess was:
How can I make this better in the future?
What one thing could my partner do next time to ovoid this
problem?
As you work through the exercises above, you'll become more
adept at turning toward each other regularly, and the bond of
camaraderie with your spouse will deepen. This more profound
friendship will be a powerful shield against conflict. It may not
forestall every argument, but it can prevent your differences of
opinion from overwhelming your relationship. One of the ways
friendship does this is by helping to balance the power between
husband and wife.
97
When you honor and respect each other, you're usually able to
appreciate each other's point of view, even if you don't agree with it.
When there's an imbalance of power, there's almost inevitably a great
deal of marital distress.
My next principle focuses on what can happen if one spouse is
unwilling to share power with the other--and how to overcome this
difficulty. Although power-mongering is more common in husbands,
there are wives who have just as hard a time acceding to their
spouse's wishes, so my fourth principle really applies to everybody.
98
















99

6
Principle 4: Principle 4:
Let Your Partner Let Your Partner
Influence You Influence You

Jack was considering buying a used blue Honda. The car seemed like
a great deal since the seller, Phil, had only owned it for a month. The
car was for sale because Phil's company was suddenly transferring
him to London. Jack liked the car's handling and power, not to
mention the state-of the-art sound system. He was ready to do a deal,
but first, he told Phil, he wanted a mechanic to check the car. "Why?"
said Phil. "It's really a new car. It only has three hundred miles, and
you get the manufacturer's warranty."
"True," said Jack, "but I promised my wife I wouldn't buy a car
without having it inspected first."
Phil gave Jack a withering look."You let your wife tell you what
to do about cars?" he asked.
"Sure," said Jack. "Don't you?"
"Well, no. I don't--didn't. I'm divorced," said Phil.
"Well," Jack chuckled. "Maybe that's why"
Jack had the car checked by his mechanic, and it turned out that
the rear bumper needed to be replaced, so he never bought Phil's car.
100
But more importantly, he never bought Phil's attitude toward
women. Jack has made his wife a partner in his decision making. He
respects and honors his wife and her opinions and feelings. He
understands that for his marriage to thrive, he has to share the
driver's seat.
There was a time when Phil's macho attitude wasn't necessarily
a liability for a husband. But our data suggest that this is no longer
the case. In our long-term study of 130 newlywed couples, now in its
eighth year, we have found that, even in the first few months of
marriage, men who allow their wives to influence them have happier
marriages and are less likely to divorce than men who resist their
wives' influence. Statistically speaking, when a man is not willing to
share power with his partner, there is an 81 percent chance that his
marriage will self-destruct.
Obviously it takes two to make or break a marriage, so we're
not singling out men here. The point of this chapter is not to scold,
bash, or insult men. It's certainly just as important for wives to treat
their husbands with honor and respect. But my data indicate that the
vast majority of wives--even in unstable marriages--already do that.
This doesn't mean that they don't get angry and even contemptuous
of their husbands. It just means that they let their husbands influence
their decision making by taking their opinions and
feelings into account. But too often men do not return the favor.
"Anything you say, dear"?
That was the sound bite that some members of the media used,
erroneously, to sum up my study on accepting influence. It was
parodied on Saturday Night Live, pilloried by Rush Limbaugh, and
picked on by Bill Ma her, the host of Politically Incorrect. I got the
biggest chuckle from one newspaper cartoon that depicted Saddam
Hussein's wife asking him to take out the garbage and him refusing
until she held a machine gun to his head and he finally said, "Yes,
dear."
101
Our study didn't really find that men should give up all of their
personal power and let their wives rule their lives. But we did find
that the happiest, most stable marriages in the long run were those
where the husband treated his wife with respect and did not resist
power sharing and decision making with her. When the couple
disagreed, these husbands actively searched for common ground
rather than insisting on getting their way.
To arrive at these findings, we looked intently at what
happened when these newlyweds discussed an area of conflict and
also when they talked about the history of their romance. When we
analyzed the data, we were struck by a significant gender difference.
Although the wives would sometimes express anger or other
negative emotions toward their husbands, they rarely responded to
their husbands by increasing the negativity. Most of them either tried
to tone it down or matched it. So if a husband said, "You're not
listening to me!" the wife would usually say something like "Sorry,
I'm listening now" (a repair that tones down the negativity) or "I'm
finding it hard to listen to you!" which matched her husband's anger
but didn't go beyond it.
But 65 percent of the men did not take either of these
approaches. Instead, their response escalated their wives' negativity.
They did this in a very specific way: by trotting out one of the four
horsemen (criticism, contempt, defensiveness, or stonewalling). If the
wife of one of these men said, "You're not listening to me!" the
husband would either ignore her (stonewall), be defensive ("Yes, I
am!"), be critical ("I don't listen because what you say never makes
any sense"), or be contemptuous ("Why waste my time?"). Using one
of the four horsemen to escalate a conflict is a telltale sign that a man
is resisting his wife's influence.
Rather than acknowledging his wife's feelings, this husband is
using the four horsemen to drown her out, to obliterate her point of
view. This is the opposite of accepting her influence. One way or
another, this approach leads to instability in the marriage. Even if the
husband doesn't react this way very often, there's an 81 percent
chance that his marriage will be damaged.
102
Although it is always important for both husband and wife to
try to keep the four horsemen from taking over in times of conflict, it
is especially important that men be aware of the danger to their
marriage when they use one of them to escalate the negativity. For
some reason, when a wife uses the four horsemen in the same
manner, the marriage does not become more unstable. At this point,
the data do not offer an explanation for this disparity. But we know
that as a general rule women do accept influence from their
husbands, which may help to explain the gender differences in our
findings. So although it certainly makes sense for both partners to
avoid escalating conflicts in this way the bottom line is that husbands
put their marriage at added risk when they do.
Signs of resistance

I've met enough angry husbands and sparred with enough
angry radio talk show hosts to know that some men are quite up
front in their refusal to share power with their wives. Even in these
days of gender equity there are still husbands who simply refuse to
consider any opinions their wives air, and never take their feelings or
ideas into account when making decisions.
Some men claim that religious conviction requires them to be in
control of their marriages and, by extension, their wives. But there's
no religion I know of that says a man should be a bully. I am not
advocating a particular spiritual belief system about the roles of men
and women. Our research has included couples who believe the man
should be the head of the family as well as couples who hold
egalitarian viewpoints. In both kinds of marriages, emotionally
intelligent husbands have figured out the one big thing: how to
convey honor and respect. All spiritual views of life are consistent
with loving and honoring your spouse. And that's what accepting
influence is all about. After all, do you really want to make decisions
that leave your wife feeling disrespected? Is that really consistent
with religious beliefs? It is not.
This was brought home to me by a colleague, Dana Kehr, who
is a Mormon bishop. Traditional Mormon doctrine exalts patriarchy.
103
It holds that the husband should make all decisions for the family.
But Kehr and his wife have an emotionally intelligent marriage. Kehr
says he sees no conflict between his beliefs and accepting influence
from his wife. He told me, "I wouldn't think about making a decision
she disagreed with. That would be very disrespectful. We talk and
talk about it till we both agree, and then I make the decision." Kehr
intuitively realizes that a marriage can't work unless both partners
honor and respect each other. That's true whatever your belief
system.
In many cases, I suspect, men who resist letting their wives
influence them are not even aware of this tendency. There are men
who consider themselves feminists who interact with their wives in
ways that belie this label. Case in point: a hardworking software
engineer named Chad. If you asked him in the abstract his view on
gender roles, he'd come out squarely on the side of a fifty-fifty
marriage. But that's not what was playing out in the new home into
which he and his wife Martha just moved. One night he announced
that he would have to work late that Thursday Martha reminded him
that her mother was coming to visit on Friday and that she was
counting on him to help her clean the house and get the guest room
ready. "I'm really upset with you," Martha said bluntly. "Don't you
remember that my mother is coming? Why can't you shift your
schedule around?"
"Why didn't you remember I have this big project due? There's
no way I can change my schedule. I have to work--maybe even the
entire weekend," said Chad. His response upped the ante. First he
was defensive--instead of responding to Martha's complaint, he
volleyed back a complaint of his own: Why didn't she remember his
schedule? Then he threatened her by suggesting that he would have
to work even more than he had initially said. This was really a kind
of belligerence. He goaded her in "here's mud in your eye" style.
Martha became furious. She called him a lot of unfortunate
names and stormed out of the room. Chad felt like he had just been
victimized. After all, he had to work. As usual, her fury seemed to
104
have come out of nowhere. His heart started racing, and his head was
pounding. He had become flooded, which made it difficult to think
about the problem clearly or come up with a solution. All he wanted
was to escape from his wife's unfair, irrational attitude. He certainly
wasn't in the mood to find a compromise. So, feeling victimized, he
poured himself a beer and turned on the TV When Martha came back
into the room, wanting to talk, he simply ignored her. When she
started to cry, he left the room and announced he was going to bed
early.
There's certainly plenty of blame to go around in this scene.
Martha's harsh startup didn't exactly put Chad in the mood for
compromise. But there is a history to Martha's reaction. Her mother
lived in Canada and she rarely got to see her. Martha had been
planning this visit for a month and had talked to Chad on many
occasions about how excited she was to show her mother their new
house and to have her finally get to spend time with her two
grandchildren.
When Chad announced matter-of-factly that he would be
working late, without even acknowledging the impact it would have
on his mother-in-law's visit, it became clear to Martha that Chad
didn't even remember that her mother was coming. Or if he did
remember, it was such a low priority for him that he didn't consider
his working to be in any way a crisis. He had arrived at his decision
without discussing the problem with her first. Because Chad had a
history of being "in his own world," as Martha described it, she went
ballistic as soon as he made his announcement.
When a couple have an argument like this, there are so many
accusations and counter accusations that sometimes it can be hard to
determine the underlying cause. In the case of Martha and Chad,
though, there's a glaring clue that the fundamental problem is his
unwillingness to be influenced by her: When she becomes negative
("I'm really upset with you"--a straightforward complaint), he
responds by escalating the conflict. Income belligerence and the third
horseman, defensiveness. Martha becomes furious and Chad
becomes flooded, which leads him to stonewall--the fourth
horseman. Their marriage has just taken a nasty tumble down the
cascade toward divorce.
105
Think of how differently Martha and Chad would be feeling if,
instead of getting defensive, Chad had apologized to Martha and
acknowledged that he had been feeling so overwhelmed at work that
he really had forgotten about her mother's imminent visit. Or if, after
this row, Chad had attempted some repair. Martha might still have
been upset, but she wouldn't have felt devalued by Chad. If he had
listened to her vent her anger without being defensive or belligerent,
she might have calmed down. Then together they could have come
up with a solution to the problem.
Accepting influence doesn't mean never expressing negative
emotions toward your partner. Marriages can survive plenty of
flashes of anger, complaints, even criticisms. Trying to suppress
negative feelings in your spouse's presence wouldn't be good for
your marriage or your blood pressure. The problem comes when
even mild dissatisfaction on the wife's part is met by a barrage from
her husband that, instead of toning down or at the most matching her
degree of negativity (yelling back, complaining, etc.), goes beyond it.
The wives of men who accept their influence are far
less likely to be harsh with their husbands when less likely to be harsh with their husbands when
broaching a difficult marital topic. broaching a difficult marital topic.This incre This incre This increases
the odds their marriage will thrive. the odds their marriage will thrive.
Any man who isn't sold on the need to accept his wife's
influence more should consider the many pluses. Studies have shown
that marriages where the husband resists sharing power are four
times more likely to end or drone on unhappily than marriages
where the husband does not resist. We see again and again that when
the man shares power, the four horsemen aren't so prevalent. In large
part this is because his wife is far less likely to use a harsh startup
when she's upset. Because she's not angered, frustrated, or
humiliated by her husband, she is apt to begin difficult discussions
without being critical or contemptuous.
Another reason these marriages fare so well is that they have a
firm foundation for compromising. After all, the better able you are
106
to listen to what your spouse has to say and to consider her
perspective respectfully, the more likely it is that you'll be able to
come up with a solution or approach to a problem that satisfies you
both. If your ears are closed to your spouse's needs, opinions, and
values, compromise just doesn't have a chance.
What husbands can learn from wives
Perhaps most importantly, when a husband accepts his wife's
influence, his open attitude also heightens the positive in his
relationship by strengthening his friendship with his wife. This will
make it far easier for him to follow the first three principles:
deepening his love map, bolstering fondness and admiration, and
turning toward his wife as a matter of course.
This occurs not just because the absence of frequent power
struggles makes the marriage more pleasurable, but because such a
husband is open to learning from his wife. And there's no doubt that
women have plenty to teach men about friendship. In his book The
Complete Book of Guys, Dave Barry writes about the huge gap
between men and women in this regard. He recounts that every year
he and his wife get together with some old friends. The wives
immediately begin an intense catching-up conversation about their
inner feelings. He and the other husband watch the playoffs. The
men do get emotional at times--usually when deciding which kind of
pizza to order. Later, when the couples have parted company, Barry's
wife will say something like "Isn't it amazing how well George has
adjusted to having his leg amputated?" And Barry will pretend that
of course he had noticed George was missing a leg. Barry is
exaggerating, but the story is funny because it reveals a basic truth:
Women are more oriented toward discussing and understanding
feelings than are men.
I'm not suggesting that all women are sawier about emotions
and have better "people skills" than all men. There are plenty of
women who are tone deaf to social nuances and insensitive to others.
But usually women are more emotionally intelligent than their
107
husbands for one simple reason: They've had an enormous head start
in acquiring these skills. Observe children at any playground, and
you'll see that head start in action. When young boys play (usually
run-and-chase games) their priority is the game itself--not their
relationship with each other and their feelings. But for little girls,
feelings are paramount. A cry of "I'm not your friend anymore" will
stop a game cold. Whether it starts up again will depend on whether
the girls make up.
Even when a boy and girl play with the same toy the gender
difference is apparent. When four-year-old best friends Naomi and
Eric shared her baby doll she wanted to play that the doll was their
baby and they were going to show it off to their friends (relationshipbased play). He went along with this for about ten minutes, and then
the game roller-coaster into boy territory: "Hey Naomi, this baby is
dead!" he announced. "We have to get it to the hospital right away!"
He climbed into a pretend ambulance and away he went, "Brrrrrrrrr."
Naomi urged him not to drive too fast. Suddenly they both became
surgeons and saved the baby's life. (Eric wanted Naomi to be the
nurse, but she objected that girls can be surgeons too, so some things
have changed!) After the baby's life was saved, they went back to
playing Naomi's way—showing off the baby to friends.
The play styles of Naomi and Eric are equally charming and
delightful. But the plain truth is that "girlish" games offer far better
preparation for marriage and family life because they focus on
relationships. As a general rule, boys don't even include games with
relationship and domestic themes in their repertoire. Think about it:
While no preschool dress-up corner would be complete without
bridal costumes, you never see tuxedos for little pretend grooms!
Where does this difference in play styles between boys and
girls originate? Because it occurs in virtually every culture, I suspect
that it is caused mostly by biology rather than by socialization. But
whether nature or nurture is the cause of these differences, their
effect is undeniable. Because their play emphasizes social interactions
and feelings, girls undergo an extensive education into emotions by
childhood's end. Boys learn how to pitch overhand. A boy's
experience at playing cooperatively and quickly resolving conflicts
will be an asset later in the boardroom or on the construction site, but
108
it will be a liability in marriage if it comes at the expense of
understanding the emotions behind his wife's perspectives.
This difference in training is heightened by the fact that as they
get older, boys rarely play with girls, so they miss the chance to learn
from them. Although about 35 percent of preschool best friendships
are between boys and girls (like Naomi and Eric), by age seven that
percentage plummets to virtually 0 percent. From then till puberty
the sexes will have little or nothing to do with each other. This is a
worldwide phenomenon. Many explanations have been given for this
voluntary segregation. One intriguing theory, by psychologist
Eleanor Maccoby, Ph.D." at Stanford University, dovetails with my
findings on accepting influence. She found that even at very young
ages (1/2 years), boys will accept influence only from other boys
when they play, whereas girls accept influence equally from girls or
boys. At around ages five to seven, girls become fed up with this
state of affairs and stop wanting to play with boys. From that age
until puberty, our culture (and virtually all others) offers no formal
structure for ensuring that boys and girls continue to interact.
By the time Naomi and Eric are grown, the difference in their
knowledge of homemaking will be apparent. Once a couple move in
together or get engaged, the groom-to-be is suddenly immersed in
what is probably an alien world. In the Broadway play Defense of the
Cave Man, a man says that when he was first married, he saw his
wife cleaning the bathroom and asked her, "Are we moving?" In his
bachelor days, that was the only time he and his roommates bothered
to clean the bathroom. Many young husbands discover they have a
lot to learn from their wives about maintaining a home.
You can see the shell-shocked look on the face of the typical
young fiancé in any home furnishings store. He neither knows nor
cares about the difference between taffeta and chintz. All of the china
and silver patterns look remarkably alike to him. Most of all he's
thinking that this is taking an awfully long time, and if he turns
109
around suddenly he will do about $10,000 worth of damage since all
of the shelves are made of glass and placed about two feet apart,
probably just to intimidate guys like him. How will he react? If pretty
soon he hears himself saying, "Hey, that's a great pattern," another
emotionally intelligent husband has been born.
Emotionally intelligent husbands

My data on newlywed couples indicate that more husbands are being
transformed in this way. About 35 percent of the men we've studied
fall into this category. Research from previous decades suggests the
number used to be much lower. Because this type of husband honors
and respects his wife, he will be open to learning more about
emotions from her. He will come to understand her world and those
of his children and friends. He may not emote in the same way that
his wife does, but he will learn how to better connect with her
emotionally. As he does so, he'll make choices that show he honors
her. When he's watching the football game and she needs to talk, he'll
turn off the TV and listen. He is choosing "us" over "me."
I believe the emotionally intelligent husband is the next step in
social evolution. This doesn't mean that he is superior to other men in
personality, upbringing, or moral fiber. He has simply figured out
something very important about being married that the others
haven't--yet. And that is how to honor his wife and convey his
respect to her. It is really that elementary.
The new husband is likely to make his career less of a priority
than his family life because his definition of success has been revised.
Unlike husbands before him, he naturally incorporates the first three
principles into his daily life. He makes a detailed map of his wife's
world. He keeps in touch with his admiration and fondness for her,
and he communicates it by turning toward her in his daily actions.
 This benefits not only his marriage but his children as well.
Research shows that a husband who can accept influence from his
wife also tends to be an outstanding father. He is familiar with his
110
children's world and knows all about their friends and their fears.
Because he is not afraid of emotions, he teaches his children to
respect their own feelings--and themselves. He turns off the football
game for them, too, because he wants them to remember him as
having had time for them.
This new type of husband and father leads a meaningful and
rich life. Having a happy family base makes it possible for him to
create and work effectively. Because he is so connected to his wife,
she will come to him not only when she is troubled but when she is
delighted. When the city awakens to a beautiful fresh snowstorm, his
children will come running for him to see it. The people who matter
most to him will care about him when he lives and mourn him when
he dies.
The other kind of husband and father is a very sad story. He
responds to the loss of male entitlement with righteous indignation,
or he feels like an innocent victim. He may become more
authoritarian or withdraw into a lonely shell, protecting what little he
has left. He does not give others very much honor and respect
because he is engaged in a search for the honor and respect he thinks
is his due. He will not accept his wife's influence because he fears any
further loss of power. And because he will not accept influence he
will not have very much influence. The consequence is that no one
will much care about him when he lives nor mourn him when he
dies.
The chaise is here
Although there are men in traditional marriages who are
masters at accepting influence from their wives, the reality is that
sharing marital power is a relatively new concept and has come
about in the wake of vast social changes over the past few decades.
"Wearing the pants" was once the norm for a husband, but times
have changed.
Maybe all of this sounds like a feminist line, but it's also the
reality. With more than 60 percent of married women working, the
male's role as the sole breadwinner is on the wane. Increasingly
111
women's jobs provide them with a source not only of income and
economic power but of self-esteem as well. A significant number of
the core issues we see between couples today have to do with this
change in gender roles. Often wives complain that men still aren't
doing their fair share of domestic chores and child care. This is not
just an issue for young couples. We have seen the same pattern
among couples in their forties and sixties. Men who are willing to
accept influence are happily married. Those who are not seeing their
marriages become unstable. As one unhappy husband put it, "I
married June Cleaver and she turned into Murphy Brown. It's not
fair. I didn't bargain for this."
It's understandable that some men have problems with the shift
in the husband's role. For centuries men were expected to be in
charge of their families. That sense of responsibility and entitlement
gets passed down from father to son in so many subtle ways that
revising the husband's role can be a challenge for many men.
Some men may resist being influenced by their wives because
they still believe that the upheaval in gender roles is a passing fad-or
that the pendulum has swung to an extreme and soon things will
revert. But there is scientific evidence that we are living through a
cultural transformation that will not come undone. Anthropologist
Peggy San day, Ph.D." a professor at the University of Pennsylvania,
has devoted her career to studying and comparing hunter-gatherer
cultures all over the world. On the surface our lives may seem very
different from those of the peoples she studies. But human nature is
fundamentally the same. San day has identified certain factors that
determine whether a culture will be male dominant or egalitarian.
(Interestingly, no cultures were female dominant.) She has also
studied the signs that a culture is moving in one direction or the
other.
According to her research, male-dominated societies are
characterized by the following:
1. Food is quite scarce and daily life is hard. Danger lurks in the
environment.
112
2. Meat from large game animals is almost always more valued
than other foods. Hunting large game is almost always an
entirely male activity.
3. Men do not participate in the care and raising of infants. They
may care for children but not for babies,
4. There is limited female representation in the culture's sacred
symbols, especially in its creation myths.
Sanday found that the cultures in which these factors were the
most extreme were also the most male dominant. And when these
factors moved in the opposite direction, the culture also shifted to an
egalitarian mode where men and women shared power. I believe you
can see such a change happening in our culture today.
Consider:
1. Food is plentiful, and environmental conditions are not very
harsh. Enforced laws keep the bulk of people feeling relatively
safe.
2. Men are no longer the sole breadwinners or "hunters" for food.
3. Many men now want to participate in the care and raising of
infants.
There has been an explosion in the number of men who attend
childbirth classes with their wives, are present at the birth of
their children, and share in the diapering, feeding, and bathing
of their babies. Go to the park on Sunday, and you're likely to see
young fathers carrying Snuglis and pushing strollers. Many
women feel that men still don't do enough ca retaking of the
very young, but it's clear there's been a shift in attitude.
4. There is an increasingly strong female representation in our
culture's sacred symbols. Catholicism has seen an important
growth in worship involving Mary, the mother of Christ. Not
only has worship increasingly involved Mary, but her role has
shifted dramatically from being the passive recipient of the Holy
Spirit to being a woman who bravely and actively chooses to
accept the role of mother in her encounter with the angel Gabriel
113
(Luke 1:26-38). She intercedes on behalf of supplicants with love,
compassion, and understanding.
In Judaism, the Conservative and Reform movements have
rewritten prayer books to emphasize the female in the sacred. The
importance of the matriarchs is recognized, as well as the Shechinah,
the female qualities of God: forgiveness, compassion, understanding,
and love.
True, not all marriages have become more egalitarian. Many
men are still disengaged from family life. Yet a growing number are
seeking guidance in coping with the cultural change. Witness the
growing popularity of organized men's movements such as the
Promise Keepers, the Robert Ely mythopoetic movement, the Million
Man March, and the men's rights movement. People are now
marching on Washington not to demand political change but to make
new vows about their role in families. Whatever your opinion of each
of these groups, their very existence is a symptom of the seismic shift
in social relations that has left many men lost and befuddled.
The challenge for each man is to decide how to deal with this
great transformation. Our research clearly indicates that the only
effective approach is to embrace the change rather than to react with
anger and hostility. Time and again we can separate the happy from
the unstable couples based on whether the husband is willing to
accept influence from his wife.
Learn to yield
 Perhaps the fundamental difference between these two kinds of
husbands is that the "new" husband has learned that often in life he
needs to yield in order to win. When you drive through any modern
city, you encounter frustrating bottlenecks and unexpected
barricades that block your normal and rightful passage. You can take
one of two approaches to these impossible situations. One is to stop,
114
become righteously indignant, and insist that the offending obstacle
move. The other is to drive around it. The first approach will
eventually earn you a heart attack. The second approach--which I call
yielding to win--will get you home.
The classic example of a husband yielding to win concerns the
ubiquitous toilet seat issue. The typical woman gets irritated when
her husband leaves the toilet seat up, even though it only takes her a
millisecond to put it down herself. For many women a raised toilet
seat is symbolic of the male's sense of entitlement. So a man can score
major points with his wife just by putting the seat down. The wise
husband smiles at how smart he is as he drops the lid.
Accepting influence is an attitude, but it's also a skill that you
can hone if you pay attention to how you relate with your spouse. In
your day-to-day life, this means working on the first three principles
by following the advice and exercises in Chapters 3, 4, and 5. And
when you have a conflict, the key is to be willing to compromise. You
do this by searching through your partner's request for something
you can relinquish. For example, Chad, who infuriated Martha by
working late when her mother was due to visit, might not be able to
compromise on working more than usual, but perhaps he could
switch the timing of his work. He could, for example, postpone the
late night until Friday so that at least he could help Martha get the
house ready for her mother's visit. Perhaps she, Grandma, and little
sister could take their son to soccer practice on Saturday
(traditionally his task) so that he could get some work done then.
If despite plenty of effort a man is still unable to accept
influence from his wife on a particular issue, it's a sign that an
unacknowledged, unsolvable problem is stymieing his attempts. In
such a case, the key is to learn how to cope with the unsolvable
problem, using the advice in Chapter 10. One couple we studied, Tim
and Kara, faced this dilemma. They constantly argued about his
friend Buddy who Kara thought was anything but a pal.
Unemployed, he often fought with his live-in girlfriend and ended
up boozing and then crashing on their living room sofa. Kara feared
that Buddy would be a bad influence on Tim and saw his frequent
presence in their home as an invasion and a threat. But whenever she
tried to talk to Tim about it, he insisted that this was his home and
115
that he could invite over anyone he wanted. When she disagreed
with him, he would stonewall, which made her so angry she would
start yelling. Then he would accuse her of being the one with the
problem, not Buddy. Kara was infuriated by Tim's attitude. As she
saw it, he refused to respect that this was her home, too, and that he
had to share decisions about house guests with her.
More than 80 percent of the time it's the wife More than 80 percent of the time it's the wife he wife
who brings up sticky marital issues, while the who brings up sticky marital issues, while the
husband tries to avoid discussing them. This isn't husband tries to avoid discussing them. This isn't
a symptom of a troubled marriage-- a symptom of a troubled marriage--it's true in it's true in it's true in
most happy marriages as well. most happy marriages as well.
When I interviewed Tim and Kara, Tim's unwillingness to
accept influence from Kara seemed to be the core of their problem—
especially since he admitted that he saw no grounds for compromise
on the issue. Then I asked him what his friendship with Buddy meant
to him. It turned out there was more to the story. Tim explained that
he and Buddy had been pals since childhood. During high school,
when Tim's parents were going through a bitter divorce and his
home life was coming apart, Tim spent countless nights on Buddy's
couch. He believed it was now his responsibility to help out the
friend who had helped him. He felt that Kara was trying to get him to
abandon Buddy. Doing so would go against his sense of honor. He
wasn't concerned that Buddy would be a bad influence. He saw
himself as a stable, married man and took pride in his ability to help
his friend.
The more Tim talked about Buddy, the clearer it became that he
and Kara were grappling with a perpetual problem in their
relationship about their views of friendship and loyalty By
recognizing that and working on the problem together, the issue was
transformed. Tim stopped thinking about it in the context of his
"right" to do what he wanted in his own home. Kara acknowledged
that it had been Tim's "piggish" attitude--not just Buddy's presence--
that was making her so angry. She told him that she really admired
116
his loyalty--it was one of the things she loved about him. She just
worried that Buddy was taking advantage of him. He acknowledged
that Buddy could be a "user." By identifying the issue for what it was-
-a perpetual problem—and agreeing to work on it with Kara, Tim
had effectively accepted her influence. They each became better able
to see the other's perspective. In the end they agreed that Buddy
could continue to use their living room as a crash pad, but less
frequently than before.
It took getting to the heart of a perpetual problem before Tim
was able to accept influence from his wife. But in most cases the key
is just for the husband to be open to sharing power with his wife,
then to get plenty of practice doing so. A husband can start by taking
the quiz below, which will give you a sense of how skilled you
currently are at accepting your wife's influence. There's no reason
why wives shouldn't take the quiz as well, since the more open to
influence you both are, the smoother your marriage will be. Then
work through the fun exercises that follow. They will help you hone
your ability to share power.
Accepting Influence Questionnaire
Read each statement and circle T for "true" or F for "false."
1. I am really interested in my spouse's opinions on our basic issues. T F
2. I usually learn a lot from my spouse even when we disagree. T F
3. I want my partner to feel that what he or she says really counts with
me. T F
4. I generally want my spouse to feel influential in this marriage. T F
5. I can listen to my partner, but only up to a point, T F
6. My partner has a lot of basic common sense. T F
7. I try to communicate respect even during our disagreements. T F
8. If I keep trying to convince my partner, I will eventually win out. T F
9. I don't reject my spouse's opinions out of hand. T F
117
10. My partner is not rational enough to take seriously when we discuss
our issues. T F
11. I believe in lots of give and take in our discussions. T F
12. I am very persuasive and usually can win arguments with my spouse.
T F
13. I feel I have an important say when we make decisions. T F
14. My partner usually has good ideas. T F
15. My partner is basically a great help as a problem solver. T F
16. I try to listen respectfully, even when I disagree. T F
17. My ideas for solutions are usually much better than my spouse's. T F
18. I can usually find something to agree with in my partner's position.
T F
19. My partner is usually too emotional. T F
20. I am the one who needs to make the major decisions in this marriage.
T F
Scoring:
1. Give yourself one point for each "true" answer, except for
questions 5, 8, 10, 12, 17, 19, 20.
2. Subtract one point for each "true" answer to questions 5, 8, 10,
2, 17, 19, 20.
6 or above: This is an area of strength in your marriage. You
willingly cede power to your spouse, a hallmark of an emotionally
intelligent marriage.
Below 6: Your marriage could stand some improvement in this
area. You are having some difficulty accepting influence from your
spouse, which can cause a marriage to become dangerously unstable.
The first step in righting the situation is to understand just what it
means to accept influence. Reread this chapter if you're still unclear
about why it is so essential to share power with your partner. Then
the following exercises will show you how to do so.
Exercise 1: Yield to Win
Below is a series of common situations faced by couples I've studied.
Try to visualize these scenes as if you and your wife were the ones
having this conflict. (Wives who are doing this exercise should flip
118
the genders accordingly.) The more vividly you put yourself into
each situation, the more effective the exercise will be. No matter how
negative you envision your partner as sounding in these scenarios,
try to think of the negativity as her way of emphasizing how
important this issue is--not as an attack on you. In other words, try to
respond to the message, not to your partner's tone of voice. Assume
that within that message is a reasonable request with which you
could easily agree. In your notebook describe that reasonable request
in a sentence. (In some of these scenarios the demand is implied
rather than directly spoken.) Then write down what you could say to
express your cooperation. There are no right answers to these
exercises, but you'll find examples of effective responses to each of
these scenarios on pages 21122.
Example: When you come home tired from work, you like to
eat dinner and then watch TV but your wife, who works at home all
day wants to go out. One night she gets very angry and claims that
you are inconsiderate of her need to escape from the house. You say
that you are just too tired to do anything at night. She yells, "Well,
what about me? I will go crazy if I can't get out and have contact with
other people!"
Reasonable part of wife's request: To get out of the house.
You say: "I'm sorry you're going so stir crazy. What if we have a
relaxing dinner at home so I can rest, and then go out for dessert?"
1. You and your wife have not been getting along lately. Part of
the problem is that you think she spends way too much money. Now
she's insisting that you undergo expensive marital counseling. You
point out that there is simply no money to pay for that until expenses
are cut somewhere else. Your wife says, "I disagree. We can't afford
not to get counseling. It's like borrowing for a needed vacation. We've
got to do it!"
Reasonable part of wife's request:
You say:
2. Since your wife is not working, you've asked that she clean
the house and have dinner on the table by the time you come home.
119
Tonight you walk in to find that the laundry isn't folded and dinner
isn't made. You complain, and she says, "You never notice how much
I have done during the day. You just don't appreciate how much
work it takes to keep the house going."
Reasonable part of wife's request:
You say:
3. You've gone down to the local bar with a few friends to have
a couple of beers. You and your wife have argued frequently about
your going out drinking too often. Tonight she keeps calling you at
the bar to say that if you don't come home right now, she's going to
come get you. When you finally walk in the door, she is crying.
"Instead of spending all your free time with your buddies at the bar,
why don't you ever take me dancing?"
Reasonable part of wife's request:
You say:
4. It's a Saturday afternoon, and your wife has been cleaning
and telling you about some repairs the house needs. You feel that she
is not willing to make the financial sacrifices in other areas so that
you can afford these repairs. She says, "You just don't think that what
I want is important. You'll find money for things if you want them."

Reasonable part of wife's request:
You say:
5. For the past few days your wife has been complaining about
your not being very affectionate and considerate when you have sex
with her. Tonight after having sex your wife tells you she feels
dissatisfied and wants you to touch her more. You tell her that you're
not used to doing things that way. She says, "I understand how you
120
feel, but we've got to learn how to turn each other on more. I'll try to
help you."
Reasonable part of wife's request:
You say:
6. When you come home from work, the first thing you like to
do is to get comfortable, have a drink, read the paper, and take off
your shoes and socks. Sometimes you make a bit of a mess in the
living room, but you usually clean it up after dinner when you have
more energy. One night, when you haven't cleaned up, your wife
says, "It really makes me mad the way you leave your stuff around.
I'm tired, too, and I wish I didn't have to pick up after you. Why can't
you clean up before dinner?"
Reasonable part of wife's request:
You say:
7. Money has been tight lately, so you've come up with a
system in which you and your wife discuss every purchase
beforehand. Tonight you come home, and she announces she's
bought new bulbs to replace the outside lights, which just blew. She
says she bought them without consulting you because she feels the
bulbs are absolutely necessary--she doesn't feel safe at night unless
the lights are on. You tell her they may be necessary, but you can't
afford them. She says, "We need to have them whether we can afford
them or not."
Reasonable part of wife's request:
You say:
121
8. You decide to surprise your wife by buying a new car. As
soon as she sees it, she gets very upset. She says, "That's terrible! I'll
never ride in it. Take it back!"
Reasonable part of wife's request:
You say:
9. You've just come home from work feeling tired, and you still
have to run to the hardware store. Your wife, who stays home to raise
the kids, says that she has just had a terrible day with them. She asks
you to take them with you to the store so she can have some alone
time.
Reasonable part of wife's request:
You say:
10. You like to stay up late and work or watch TV Your wife
likes to go to sleep by eleven. One night around ten-thirty she comes
into the den where you're watching TV and asks you to come to bed.
She says that it bothers her that you don't come to bed until after
she's asleep, because she'd like to have sex more often.
Reasonable part of wife's request:
You say:
Sample Answers
1.Reasonable part of wife's request: Your marriage does need help.
You say: "I agree that improving our marriage is very important.
Maybe counseling is the answer. Let's think about how we can cut down
122
somewhere else so we can afford it. Then I won't be so worried about the
money."
2. Reasonable part of wife's request: To feel appreciated for the work
she does around the house.
You say: "I'm sorry. You're right, I haven't noticed. Let's start over
again. Help me to appreciate what has been done. Then maybe I can also
pitch in and fold some of this laundry. You have been doing a lot lately.
Maybe tonight we should go out to dinner."
3. Reasonable part of wife's request: To spend more of your free time
with her.
You say: "Great idea. Let's go down to McSorley's and dance until
we see dawn together like in the old days."
4. Reasonable part of wife's request: Your house does need some
repairs.
You say: "Okay, maybe you're right. What repairs do you think we
need to do?"
5. Reasonable part of wife's request: For you to focus on what turns
heron.
You say: "This is hard for me to talk about, but I'll try to listen to
you. Tell me how you want to be touched."
6. Reasonable part of wife's request: For you to clean up before
dinner.
You say: "Sorry, okay, I'll clean up." Then do it.
7. Reasonable part of wife's request: Buying the outside lights was
necessary.
You say: "You're absolutely right that we need them. It's fine that
you bought the lights. Thank you for doing it. But next time can we talk it
over first, like we usually do?"
8. Reasonable part of wife's request: Not to surprise her with a new
car.
You say: "We need to talk about this car. Tell me why you're upset."
9. Reasonable part of wife's request: To get a break from the kids.
You say; "Okay. Let's go for a ride, kids. Ice cream on the way for
everybody!"
10. Reasonable part of wife's request: To have sex more often,
You say: "Great idea. Can you wear the satin nightie? I love making
love to you."
123
Now that you've worked through these examples, you should
have a better sense of what it means to "give" in a relationship. The
next step is to get used to giving to your spouse and sharing power
more in your own marriage. The following fun exercise lets you work
on making decisions together. As you do it, remember that the goal is
for both of you to be influential and to accept each other's influence.
Exercise 2: The Gottman Island
Survival Game
Imagine that your cruise ship just sank in the Caribbean, and you
awaken to find yourselves on a tropical desert island. Gilligan and
Ginger are nowhere in sight--the two of you are the only survivors.
One of you is injured. You have no idea where you are, you think
there's some chance that people know of the ship's distress, but
you're not sure, a storm appears to be on the way. You decide that
you need to prepare to survive on this island for some time and also
to make sure you'll be spotted by a rescue party. There is a bunch of
stuff from the ship on the beach that could help you, but you can
only carry ten items.
Your Mission
Step 1: Each of you writes down on a separate piece of paper
what you consider the ten most important items to keep from the
inventory list below, based on your survival plan. Then rank-order
these items based on their importance to you. Give the most crucial
item a, the next most crucial a 2, and so on. There is no right or wrong
answers.
Ship’s Inventory
1. Two changes of clothing
2. AM-FM and short-wave radio receiver
3. Ten gallons of water
4. Pots and pans
124
5. Matches
6. Shovel
7. Backpack
8. Toilet paper
9. Two tents
10. Two sleeping bags
11. Knife
12. Small life raft, with sail
13. Sun block lotion
14. Cook stove and lantern
15. Long rope
16. Two walkie-talkie sender-receiver units
17. Freeze-dried food for seven days
18. One change of clothing
19. One fifth of whiskey
20. Flares
21. Compass
22. Regional aerial maps
23. Gun with six bullets
24. Fifty packages of condoms
25. First-aid kit with penicillin
26. Oxygen tanks
Step 2: Share your list with your partner. Together come up
with a consensus list often items. That means talking it over and
working as a team to solve the problem together. Both of you need to
be influential in discussing the problem and in making the final
decisions.
When you've finished, it's time to evaluate how the game went.
You should both answer the questions below.
1. How effective do you think you were at influencing your spouse?
a) Not at all effective
b) Neither effective nor ineffective
c) Somewhat effective
d) Very effective
125
2. How effective was your spouse at influencing you?
a) Not at all effective
b) Neither effective nor ineffective
c) Somewhat effective
d) Very effective
3. Did either of you try to dominate the other, or were you
competitive with each other?
a) A lot
b) Somewhat
c) A little
d) Not at all
4. Did you sulk or withdraw?
a) A lot
b) Somewhat
c) A little
d) Not at all
5. Did your partner sulk or withdraw?
a) A lot
b) Somewhat
c) A little
d) Not at all
6. Did you have fun?
a) Not at all
b) A little
c) Somewhat
d) A lot
7. Did you work well as a team?
a) Not at all
b) A little
c) Somewhat
d) A great deal
126
8. How much irritability or anger did you feel?
a) A lot
b) Some
c) A little
d) None
9. How much irritability or anger did your partner feel?
a) A lot
b) Some
c) A little
d) None
10. Did you both feel included?
a) Not at all
b) A little
c) A reasonable amount
d) A great deal
Scoring: Give yourself one point for each "a" answer, two points for each
"b" answer, three points for each "c" answer, and 4 points for each "d"
answer. Tally your score.
If your final number is over 24, you're doing a good job of accepting
each other's influence and working together as a team. If you scored 24 or
below, your marriage needs further work in this area.
If you're having difficulty accepting influence, one of the best
things you can do for your marriage is to acknowledge the problem
and talk with your spouse about it. Nobody can change old habits
overnight. But if you're able to take responsibility for the parts of
your marital troubles that are caused by your difficulty with sharing
power, that in itself will be a major leap forward for your marriage.
Your spouse is likely to feel a great sense of relief and renewed
optimism about improving your marriage. The next step is to make
your partner an ally in your crusade to overcome this problem. Ask
her (or him) to gently point out to you instances where you are being
unwittingly domineering, defensive, or disrespectful.
127
Because all of the Seven Principles are interrelated, the more
you work on the others, the easier it will become for you to share
power. And of course, the more skilled you become at accepting
influence, the easier it will be for you to adhere to the other
principles. A willingness to share power and to respect the other
person's view is a prerequisite of compromising. For that reason,
becoming more adept at accepting influence will help you cope far
better with marital conflict -The focus of Principles 5 and 6. As you'll
see, there are two major categories of disagreements that virtually all
couples experience. When coping with either kind, accepting
influence will be a cornerstone of success.
128
129

7

The Two Kinds of The Two Kinds of

Maritial Conflict Maritial Conflict
Every marriage is a union between two individuals who bring if to it
their own opinions, personality quirks, and values. So it's no wonder
that even in very happy marriages the husband and wife must cope
with a profusion of marital issues. Some conflicts are just minor
irritants, but others can seem overwhelmingly complex and intense.
Too often couples feel mired in conflict or have distanced themselves
from each other as a protective device.
Although you may feel your situation is unique, we have found
that all marital conflicts, ranging from mundane annoyances to allout wars, really fall into one of two categories: Either they can be
resolved, or they are perpetual, which means they will be a part of
your lives forever, in some form or another. Once you are able to
identify and define your various disagreements, you'll be able to
customize your coping strategies, depending on which of these two
types of conflict you're having.
130
Perpetual problems
Unfortunately, the majority of marital conflicts fall into this category69 percent, to be exact. Time and again when we do four- year
follow-ups of couples, we find that they are still arguing about
precisely the same issue. It's as if four minutes have passed rather
than four years. They've donned new clothes, altered their hairstyles,
and gained (or lost) a few pounds and wrinkles, but they're still
having the same argument. Here are some typical Perpetual
problems that the happy couples in our studies are living with:
1. Meg wants to have a baby, but Donald says he's not ready yet-
-and doesn't know if he ever will be.
2. Walter wants sex far more frequently than Dana.
3. Chris is lax about housework and rarely does his share of the
chores until Susan nags him, which makes him angry.
4. Tony wants to raise their children as Catholics. Jessica is
Jewish and wants their children to follow her faith.
5. Angie thinks Ron is too critical of their son. But Ron thinks he
has the right approach: Their son has to be taught the proper
way to do things.
Despite their differences these couples remain very satisfied
with their marriages because they have hit upon a way to deal with
their unbudgeable problem so it doesn't overwhelm them. They've
learned to keep it in its place and to have a sense of humor about it.
For example, one couple we studied, Melinda and Andy, have an
ongoing conflict over his reluctance to go on outings with her family.
But when they talk to me about this problem, they don't get angry;
they simply relate good-naturedly what happens. Andy starts to tell
me what he always ends up saying. Melinda, who knows it all so
well, jumps in and offers up his quote for him, mimicking his putupon voice: "All right, I'll go." Then Andy adds that he also says,
"Okay, sure, anything you say, dear."
"We still continue to do that," Melinda explains to me. Then
Andy chuckles and adds, "We don't even disagree good, do we?"
131
Melinda and Andy haven't solved their problem, but they've learned
to live with it and approach it with good humor.
Despite what many therapists will tell you, Despite what many therapists will tell you,
you don't have to resolve your major marital you don't have to resolve your major marital
conflicts for your marriage to thrive. conflicts for your marriage to thrive. marriage to thrive.
 Another happy couple, Carmen and Bill, have a perpetual
problem over their disparate degrees of orderliness. Carmen has the
discipline of a drill sergeant, while he is a classic absentminded
professor. For Carmen's sake, Bill tries to think about where he's
putting things. For his sake, she tries not to nag him when things get
lost. When she finds, say, last month's phone bill under a two-foot
pile of newspapers in their recycling bin, she'll make her point by
gently teasing him--unless she's feeling excess stress that day, in
which case she'll probably throw a fit, after which he'll make her a
mug of hot chocolate as contrition, and they'll go on happily with
their day in other words, they are constantly working it out, for the
most part good-naturedly. At times it gets better, other times it gets
worse. But because they keep acknowledging the problem and
talking about it, their love for each other isn't overwhelmed by their
difference.
These couples intuitively understand that problems are
inevitably part of a relationship, much the way chronic physical
ailments are inevitable as you get older. They are like a trick knee, a
bad back, an irritable bowel, or tennis elbow. We may not love these
problems, but we are able to cope with them, to avoid situations that
worsen them, and to develop strategies and routines that help us deal
with them. Psychologist Clan Wile said it best in his book After the
Honeymoon: "When choosing a long-term partner…you will
inevitably be choosing a particular set of unsolvable problems that
you'll be grappling with for the next ten, twenty or fifty years."
Marriages are successful to the degree that the problems you
choose are ones you can cope with. Wile writes: "Paul married Alice
and Alice gets loud at parties and Paul, who is shy, hates that. But if
Paul had married Susan, he and Susan would have gotten into a fight
before they even got to the party. That's because Paul is always late
132
and Susan hates to be kept waiting. She would feel taken for granted,
which she is very sensitive about. Paul would see her complaining
about this as her attempt to dominate him, which he is very sensitive
about. If Paul had married Gail, they wouldn't have even gone to the
party because they would still be upset about an argument they had
the day before about Paul's not helping with the housework. To Gail,
when Paul does not help, she feels abandoned, which she is sensitive
about, and to Paul, Gail's complaining is an attempt at domination,
which he is sensitive about." And so it goes.
In unstable marriages, perpetual problems like these eventually
kill the relationship. Instead of coping with the problem effectively,
the couple gets gridlocked over it. They have the same conversation
about it over and over again. They just spin their wheels, resolving
nothing. Because they make no headway, they feel increasingly hurt,
frustrated, and rejected by each other. The four horsemen become
ever more present when they argue, while humor and affection
become less so. They become all the more entrenched in their
positions. Gradually they feel physiologically overwhelmed. They
start a slow process of trying to isolate or enclose this problem area.
But actually they have started becoming emotionally disengaged
from each other. They are on the course toward parallel lives and
inevitable loneliness--the death knell of any marriage.
The signs of gridlock
If you're not sure whether you've gridlocked over a perpetual
problem or are coping well with it, this checklist will help. The
characteristics of a gridlocked problem are:
• The conflict makes you feel rejected by your partner.
• You keep talking about it but make no headway.
• You become entrenched in your positions and are unwilling to
budge.
• When you discuss the subject, you end up feeling more
frustrated and hurt.
133
• Your conversations about the problem are devoid of humor,
amusement, or affection.
• You become even more unbudgeable over time, which leads
you to vilify each other during these conversations.
• This vilification makes you all the more rooted in your position
and polarized, more extreme in your view, and all the less
willing to compromise.
• Eventually you disengage from each other emotionally.
If this sounds painfully familiar, take comfort in knowing that
there is a way out of gridlock, no matter how entrenched in it you
are. As you'll see when we get to Principle 6, all you need is
motivation and a willingness to explore the hidden issues that are
really causing the gridlock. The key will be to uncover and share with
each other the significant personal dreams you have for your life. I
have found that unrequited dreams are at the core of every
gridlocked conflict. In other words, the endless argument symbolizes
some profound difference between you that needs to be addressed
before you can put the problem in its place.
Solvable problems
These problems may sound relatively simple compared with
unsolvable ones, but they can cause a great deal of pain between
husband and wife. Just because a problem is solvable doesn't mean it
gets resolved. When a solvable problem causes excessive tension, it's
because the couple haven't learned effective techniques for
conquering it. They aren't to blame--far too many of the conflict
resolution ideas recommended by marriage manuals and therapists
are not easy to master or apply. Most of these strategies focus on
validating your partner's perspective and learning to be a good
listener. There's nothing wrong with this--except that it's very hard
for most people to do at any time, much less when they're distressed.
My fifth principle for making marriage work tackles solvable
problems head on. It offers an alternative approach to conflict
134
resolution based on my research into what goes right when
emotionally intelligent couples handle a disagreement. I will show
you how to: (1) Make sure your startup is soft rather than harsh, (2)
Learn the effective use of repair attempts, (3) Monitor your
physiology during tense discussions for warning signs of flooding,
(4) Learn how to compromise, and (5) Be more tolerant of each other's
imperfections. Follow this advice, and you're likely to find that
solvable problems no longer interfere with your marital happiness.
Telling the difference

If you and your spouse are entrenched in conflict, it may not be
obvious which of the two types of disagreement you're havinggridlocked or solvable. One way to identify solvable problems is that
they seem less painful, gut-wrenching, or intense than perpetual,
gridlocked ones. That's because when you argue over a solvable
problem, your focus is only on a particular dilemma or situation.
There is no underlying conflict that's fueling your dispute.
For example, both Rachel and Eleanor complain that their
husbands drive too fast. Eleanor has been arguing with her husband
Clan about this for years. He always tells her the same thing--she's
overreacting. He's never had an accident, he reminds her. He says he
is not an aggressive driver, he's an assertive one. She tells him she
doesn't understand why he can't change his driving habits so she'll
feel less nervous in the car. She ends up yelling that he's selfish, that
he doesn't care if he kills both of them, and so on. He tells her the real
problem is that she doesn't trust him. Each time they have this
squabble, they feel all the more frustrated and hurt and ever more
entrenched in their positions. There's a lot of vilifying on both sides:
Clan accuses her of being distrustful. She accuses him of being
uncaring.
For Eleanor and Clan, speeding constitutes a perpetual problem
they will probably never fully resolve. That's because their
disagreement symbolizes deeper conflicts between them. They are
really arguing about Big Issues like trust, security, selfishness. To
keep their ongoing battles over driving from ruining their marriage,
135
they'll need to understand the deeper meaning that this battle has for
each of them. Only then will they be able to manage it effectively.
But for Rachel and Jason, disagreements over driving speeds
constitute a solvable problem. Every morning they commute together
from their suburban home to downtown Pittsburgh. She thinks he
drives too fast. He says he has to speed because she takes so long to
get ready If he doesn't make up for her dawdling by speeding, they'll
both be late to work. Rachel says it takes her so long in the morning
because he showers first and takes forever. Plus, he always leaves the
breakfast dishes on the table. While she's busy washing them, he's
honking the horn for her to hurry. Every workday starts with
accusations and counter accusations about showering time and
household chores. By the time Jason drops Rachel off at her office,
he's stonewalling and she's fighting back tears.
This couple's difficulty over driving is a solvable problem
because, for starters, it is situational--it occurs only when they are
going to work, and it doesn't reverberate into other areas of their
lives. Unlike Eleanor and Clan, they don't vilify each other. Their
arguments aren't about his selfishness or her being distrustful-they're
simply about driving and their morning routine. By learning a more
effective way to talk with each other about the issue, they could
readily find a compromise. They could put blame aside and work out
a schedule that got them to work on time, without passing the speed
limit. Maybe they could set their alarm fifteen minutes earlier, or she
could shower first, or he could just remember to deal with the dishes.
However, if they don't work to find a compromise on this issue,
it's likely that they will become increasingly resentful and entrenched
in their positions. The conflict could deepen and take on more
symbolic meaning. In other words, it could evolve into a gridlocked,
perpetual problem.
Below I've described various scenarios of marital conflict. For
each one, mark whether you think it's solvable or perpetual.
1. Cliff and Lynn agree that it's Cliff's job to take out the kitchen trash
every evening after dinner. But lately he's been so distracted by a big
deadline looming at work that he forgets. Either Lynn ends up
136
throwing out the garbage herself or the trash just sits there. By
morning the apartment smells like a city dump, and Lynn is in a rage.
Solvable _____ Perpetual _____
2. Elise wants to spend less time with Joel and more time with her
friends. Joel says this makes him feel abandoned. Elise says that she
needs time away from him. He seems very needy to her, and she's
feeling suffocated by him.
Solvable _____ Perpetual _____
3. Ingrid wishes that Gary would bring up things that are bothering
him rather than sulking. But when he does try to tell her when he's
upset by some things that she's done, she gets critical about how he
has brought them up. She asks him not to mention so many at the
same time. He says that since it's so hard for him to discuss such
things, he wants a reward when he does: Namely, he wants Amy to
say she's sorry instead of criticizing his style of communication.
Solvable _____ Perpetual _____
4. Helena gets together with her friends every Monday night.
Jonathan wants her to take a ballroom dancing class together with
him, but the only night the class is held is Monday Helena doesn't
want to give up her girls' night out.
Solvable _____ Perpetual _____
5. Penny complains that Roger expects her to do all the work taking
care of their newborn son. Roger says he'd like to do more, but
because he works during the day, he isn't as experienced as his wife
at diapering, bathing, and the like. Whenever he does try to do
something, like pick up the baby when he cries, Penny tells him he's
doing it wrong. This makes him angry and he ends up telling her to
do it herself.
Solvable _____ Perpetual _____
137
6. Jim works full time while Thea is a stay-at-home mom. He wants
her to be more organized about running the house--to clean it more,
and to do a better job of planning the mornings so the kids get to
school on time. He acts smug and superior to her and gives her the
sense that the disorganization in their house is due to a character flaw
she has. She feels attacked and gets defensive whenever he raises the
subject. She says their house is supposed to be a home, not an army
barracks, and that he needs to relax about these issues because his
demands are unreasonable. They have been arguing about this for
four years.
Solvable _____ Perpetual _____
7. Whenever Brian and Allyssa have a disagreement, he quickly
raises his voice. Allyssa feels intense stress when he yells and tells
him to stop. Brian says he doesn't see anything wrong with yelling
when he's upset. Allyssa starts to cry and tells him she can't take it.
So they find themselves fighting over his yelling rather than
whatever issue they disagreed about.
Solvable _____ Perpetual _____
8. Ever since their baby was born, Kurt has felt that Irene is squeezing
him out of her life. She insists on doing all of the child care herself
and doesn't seem to have time for him anymore. She has been
thinking a lot about her own childhood. (Her parents divorced when
she was two and she was shuffled between relatives' homes for
years.) She tells Kurt she doesn't want their son Brendan to feel
abandoned by her, as she did by her own mother. But Kurt feels
betrayed because one of the things he's always loved about
Irene is how nurturing and motherly she is toward him. Now that's
all being directed at the baby, and he feels cheated.
Solvable _____ Perpetual _____
9. Oscar just inherited $5,000 from his great-aunt. He wants to use it
to buy home exercise equipment. But Mary thinks they should save it
138
for a down payment on a house. Oscar says the inheritance is really
not enough to make a dent in a down payment, so why not use it for
something they could enjoy right away? But Mary believes that every
little bit adds up and that they have to save as much as they can all
the time.
Solvable _____ Perpetual _____
10. Anita thinks Bert is stingy about tipping waiters, cab drivers, and
so on. This upsets her because part of her image of a strong, sexy man
is someone who's generous. When she's disappointed with Bert, she
gets very contemptuous of him. Meanwhile, Bert believes that Anita
is too loose with their money, which makes him nervous. To him,
money represents security and a sense of control over his life, so it's
hard to give any of it up.
Solvable _____ Perpetual _____
Answers
1. Solvable. Cliff has stopped taking out the garbage only recently
and for a specific reason that's not related in any deep way to his
relationship with Lynn--namely, he's under a lot of stress at work.
This problem could be solved in any number of ways--from putting a
sign on the refrigerator door to remind him, to reshuffling their
domestic chores so that Lynn gets garbage detail for a while until
Cliff's work deadline passes.
2. Perpetual. This problem suggests a core difference between Elise
and Joel in their personalities and what they need from each other to
feel close and connected. This difference is unlikely to change--they'll
need to adjust to it.
3. Perpetual. Ingrid and Gary are engaged in a meta communication
war. This means that they aren't having difficulty communicating
about a certain issue; they're having difficulty communicating about
how to communicate. This is not related to a specific situation but is
present whenever they have a disagreement.
139
4. Solvable. Helena and Jonathan can resolve this issue in a number
of ways. Perhaps they could switch off weekly between dancing class
and Helena's girls' night out. Or maybe her friends would be willing
to switch the night. Or Jonathan could find another dancing class on
another night or on the weekend. Or one of them could simply agree
not to push it.
5. Solvable. Roger just needs to spend more time with his son so he
can get up to speed on his care. And Penny needs to back off and let
Roger approach baby care his way. Because this issue isn't related to
deep-seated needs either of them has, it can be readily solved
through compromise.
6. Perpetual. This problem probably started out as a situational one
about housecleaning and organization. Perhaps Jim and Thea have
different tolerance levels for clutter, dirt, and how planned out one's
life should be. But because they haven't found a compromise position
about running their house, they have continued to argue about these
differences. Thea has come to feel her husband doesn't value or
respect her role, while he feels that she's not holding up her end of
the marriage by keeping the household well organized.
The argument has become about their mutual resentment rather than
about housekeeping.
7. Perpetual. Brian and Allyssa have different emotional styles. He
tends to be volatile, meaning that he's very passionate and "out there"
with his emotions. Allyssa prefers to discuss issues quietly and
rationally. When Brian starts yelling at her, she feels overwhelmed
and quickly becomes flooded. Since emotional style is part of one's
personality neither of them is likely to change. But by becoming
aware of and respecting each other's emotional style, they can find an
approach to conflict resolution they are both comfortable with.
8. Perpetual. At the core Irene and Kurt have different emotional
needs. The huge change in their marriage that was created by their
child's birth has thrown what they need from each other out of sync.
140
9. Solvable. Oscar and Mary may have different philosophies about
savings. But their conflict over money doesn't appear to be symbolic.
Instead, it's a straightforward difference of opinion about what to do
with Oscar's inheritance. For that reason, they could probably find a
straightforward compromise. Perhaps, for example, they could spend
half of the amount on equipment and save the rest.
10. Perpetual. Money has very different meanings to Bert and Anita.
Since the symbolic significance of money is usually rooted in
childhood experiences, it's unlikely that Bert will naturally transform
into a big tipper or that Anita will suddenly learn to love clipping
coupons. But if they work together on this perpetual problem (and
especially Anita's contempt for her husband about this issue), it will
cease to be a major sore spot in their relationship.
Assessing Your Marital Conflict
Questionnarie
Now that you have a greater understanding of the differences
between solvable and perpetual problems, it's time to categorize your
own marital issues in this way. By doing so you'll know which
strategies to use to cope with them. Below is a list of seventeen
common causes of conflict in a marriage.
For each, mark whether it is a perpetual problem in your marriage, a
solvable problem for you, or not a problem right now. If it is either a
solvable or a perpetual problem, check all of the specific subareas
that you think are currently troublesome.
1. We are becoming emotionally distant.
Perpetual __ Solvable __ Not a problem right now __
Check any of the specific items below that are problems within this
general area:
_ We have difficulty just simply talking to each other.
_ We are staying emotionally in touch with each other less.
141
_I feel taken for granted.
_ I feel my spouse doesn't know me right now.
_ My spouse is (or am) emotionally disengaged,
_ We spend less time together.
Comments:
2. There is spillover of non marital stresses (such as job tension) into
our marriage.
Perpetual __ Solvable __ Not a problem right now __
Check any of the specific items below that are problems within this
general area:
_ We don't always help each other reduce daily stresses.
_ We don't talk about these stresses together.
_ We don't talk together about stress in a helpful manner.
_ My spouse doesn't listen with understanding about my stresses and
worries.
_ My spouse takes job or other stresses out on me.
_ My spouse takes job or other stresses out on the children or others.
Comments:

3. Our marriage is becoming non romantic and passionless; the fire is
dying.
Perpetual __ Solvable __ Not a problem right now __
Check any of the specific items below that are problems within this
general area;
_ My spouse has stopped being verbally affectionate.
_ My spouse expresses love or admiration less frequently.
_ We rarely touch each other.
142
_ My spouse (or I) have stopped feeling very romantic.
_ We rarely cuddle.
_ We have few tender or passionate moments.
Comments:
4. We are having problems in our sex life.
Perpetual __ Solvable __ Not a problem right now __
Check any of the specific items below that are problems within this
general area:
_ Sex is less frequent.
_ I (or my spouse) get less satisfaction from sex.
_ We have problems talking about sexual problems.
_ Each of us wants different things sexually.
_ Desire is less than it once was.
_ Our lovemaking feels less loving.
Comments:
5. Our marriage is not dealing well with an important change (such
as the birth of a child, a job loss, move, illness, or death of a loved
one).
Perpetual __ Solvable __ Not a problem right now __
Check any of the specific items below that are problems within this
general area:
_ We have very different views on how to handle things.
_ This event has led my partner to be very distant.
_ This event has made us both irritable,
_ This event has led to a lot of fighting.
143
_I'm worried about how this will all turn out, We are now taking
very different positions.
Comments:
6. Our marriage is not handling well a major issue about children,
(This category includes whether to have a child.)
Perpetual __ Solvable __ Not a problem right now __
Check any of the specific items below that are problems within this
general area:
_ We have very different goals for our children.
_ We differ on what to discipline children for.
_ We differ on how to discipline our children.
_ We have issues on how to be close to our kids.
_ We are not talking about these problems well.
_ There is much tension and anger about these differences.
Comments:

7. Our marriage is not handling well a major issue or event
concerning in-laws or another relatives).
Perpetual __ Solvable __ Not a problem right now __
Check any of the specific items below that are problems within this
general area:
_ I feel unaccepted by my partner's family.
_ I sometimes wonder which family my spouse is in.
_ I feel unaccepted by my own family
_ There is tension between us about what might happen.
_ This issue has generated a lot of irritability.
144
_ I worry about how this will turn out.
Comments:
8. One of us is flirtatious outside the marriage, or may have had a
recent affair, and or there is jealousy.
Perpetual __ Solvable __ Not a problem right now __
Check any of the specific items below that are problems within this
general area:
_ This area is the source of a lot of hurt.
_ This is an area that creates insecurity, _ I can't deal with the lies.
_ It is hard to reestablish trust.
_ There is a feeling of betrayal.
_ It's hard to know how to heal over this.
Comments:
9. Unpleasant fights have occurred between us.
Perpetual __ Solvable __ Not a problem right now __

Check any of the specific items below that are problems within this
general area:
_ There are more fights now.
_ Fights seem to come out of nowhere,
_ Anger and irritability have crept into our marriage.
_ We get into muddles where we are hurting each other.
_ I don't feel very respected lately.
_ feel criticized.
Comments:
145
10. We have differences in our basic goals and values or desired
lifestyle.
Perpetual __ Solvable __ Not a problem right now __
Check any of the specific items below that are problems within this
general area:
_ Differences have arisen in life goals,
_ Differences have arisen about important beliefs.
_ Differences have arisen on leisure time interests.
_ We seem to want different things out of life.
_ We are growing in different directions.
_ I don't much like who I am with my partner.
Comments:
11. Very disturbing events (for example, violence, drugs, an affair)
have occurred within our marriage.
Perpetual __ Solvable __ Not a problem right now __
Check any of the specific items below that are problems within this
general area:
_There has been physical violence between us.
_ There is a problem with alcohol or drugs.
_ This is turning into a marriage I hadn't bargained for.
_ Our marriage "contract" is changing,
_ I find some of what my partner wants upsetting or repulsive.
_ I am now feeling somewhat disappointed by this marriage.
Comments:
12. We are not working well as a team.
Perpetual __ Solvable __ Not a problem right now __
146
Check any of the specific items below that are problems within this
general area:
_ We used to share more of the family's workload.
_ We seem to be pulling in opposite directions.
_ My spouse does not fairly share in housework or child care,
_ My spouse is not carrying his or her weight financially.
_ I feel alone managing this family.
_ My spouse is not being very considerate.
Comments:
13. We are having trouble sharing power and influence.
Perpetual __ Solvable __ Not a problem right now __

Check any of the specific items below that are problems within this
general area:
_ I don't feel influential in decisions we make.
_ My spouse has become more domineering.
_ I have become more demanding.
_ My spouse has become passive.
_ My spouse is "spacey," not a strong force in our marriage,
_ I am starting to care a lot more about who is running things.
Comments:

14. We are having trouble handling financial issues well.
Perpetual __ Solvable __ Not a problem right now __
Check any of the specific items below that are problems within this
general area:
_ One of us doesn't bring in enough money.
147
_ We have differences about how to spend money,
_ We are stressed about finances.
_ My spouse is financially more interested in self than in us,
_ We are not united in managing our finances.
_ There is not enough financial planning.
Comments:
15. We are not having much fun together these days.
Perpetual __ Solvable __ Not a problem right now __
Check any of the specific items below that are problems within this
general area:
_ We don't seem to have much time for fun,
_ We try but don't seem to enjoy our times together very much.
_ We are too stressed for fun.
_ Work takes up all our time these days.
_ Our interests are so different, there are no fun things we like to do
together.
_ We plan fun things to do, but they never happen.
Comments:

16. We are not feeling close about spiritual issues these days.
Perpetual __ Solvable __ Not a problem right now __
Check any of the specific items below that are problems within this
general area:
_ We do not share the same beliefs.
_ We do not agree about religious ideas and values.
_ We differ about the specific church, mosque, or synagogue.
_ We do not communicate well about spiritual issues.
_ We have issues about spiritual growth and change.
_ We have spiritual issues involving family or children.
148
Comments:

17. We are having conflict(s) about being a part of and building
community together.
Perpetual __ Solvable __ Not a problem right now __
Check any of the specific items below that are problems within this
general area:
_ We feel differently about being involved with friends and other
people or groups.
_ We don't care to the same degree about the institutions that build
community.
_ We have different opinions about putting time into the institutions
of community (political party, school, hospital, church, mosque,
synagogue, agencies, and the like).
_ We disagree about doing projects or working for charity.
_ We disagree about doing other good deeds for others.
_ We have different views about whether to take a leadership role in
the service of our community.
Scoring: For each of the seventeen general areas that cause you
problems, count up the number of specific bones of contention that
you've checked. If you've checked more than two, then this is an area
of significant conflict in your marriage. For solvable problems, you'll
find advice in Chapter 8. But if some of your problems are perpetual,
follow the advice in Chapter 10 as well. No doubt you'll find that
your marriage, like most, is coping with both types of problems.
The key to all conflict resolution
In the chapters ahead you will find specific techniques that will help
you to manage your marital troubles, whether perpetual or solvable.
149
But first, some overall advice. The basis for coping effectively with
either kind of problem is the same: communicating basic acceptance
of your partner's personality Human nature dictates that it is
virtually impossible to accept advice from someone unless you feel
that that person understands you. So the bottom-line rule is that,
before you ask your partner to change the way he or she drives, eats,
or makes love, you must make your partner feel that you are
understanding.
If either (or both) of you feels judged, misunderstood, or
rejected by the other, you will not be able to manage the problems in
your marriage. This holds for big problems and small ones.
You may discover that your partner is more You may discover that your partner is more
conciliatory during arguments than you realized- conciliatory during arguments than you realizedonce you know what to listen for. once you know what to listen for.
It's probably easiest to acknowledge this truth if you think
about it from your own perspective. Say you want your spouse's
advice on handling a disagreement you're having with your boss. If
your spouse immediately begins criticizing you and insisting that
your boss is right, you're wrong, and what's the matter with you for
picking a fight with your boss anyway, you'd probably regret having
brought it up. Most likely you'd get defensive, angry, offended, hurt,
or any combination of these. And yet your spouse might honestly
say, "But I was only trying to help." There's a big difference between
"You are such a lousy driver. Would you please slow down before
you kill us?" and "I know how much you enjoy driving fast. But it
makes me really nervous when you go over the speed limit. Could
you please slow down?"
Maybe that second approach takes a bit longer. But that extra
time is worth it since it is the only approach that works. It's just a fact
that people can change only if they feel that they are basically liked
and accepted as they are. When people feel criticized, disliked, and
unappreciated they are unable to change. Instead, they feel under
siege and dig in to protect themselves.
Adults could learn something in this regard from research into
child development. We now know that the key to instilling in
150
children a positive self-image and effective social skills is to
communicate to them that we understand their feelings. Children
grow and change optimally when we acknowledge their emotions
("That doggie scared you," "You're crying because you're sad right
now," "You sound very angry. Let's talk about it") rather than be little
or punish them for their feelings ("It's silly to be afraid of such a little
dog," "Big boys don't cry," "No angry bears allowed in this house--go
to your room till you calm down"). When you let a child know that
his or her feelings are okay to have, you are also communicating that
the child himself or herself is acceptable even when sad or crabby or
scared. This helps the child to feel good about himself or herself,
which makes positive growth and change possible. The same is true
for adults. In order to improve a marriage, we need to feel accepted
by our spouse.
Another important lesson I have learned is that in all
arguments, both solvable and perpetual, no one is ever right. There is
no absolute reality in marital conflict, only two subjective realities.
The following exercise will, I hope, help you come to see that by
walking you through an analysis of the last argument you had--of
either type.
Exercise: Your Last Argument
Answer the questions below in regard to the last argument you two
had.
You'll see that this exercise is very similar to the one on p. 93 ("What
to Do When Your Spouse Doesn't Turn toward You"). That's because
both of these situations are founded in what I call "subjective reality."
In other words, when you and your spouse are not in sync, either in
little ways (not turning toward each other) or in bigger ways
(actually fighting), your perspectives on what happened and why are
likely to be very different. Whether your conflict is perpetual or
solvable, you'll find coping with it far easier the more you are able to
respect each other's point of view, even if it is very different from
your own.
There is no answer key for the following questions. Use them to
spark some mutual soul-searching with your spouse.
151
During this argument I felt:
1. Defensive A Great Deal Definitely a little Not at all
2. Hurt A Great Deal Definitely a little Not at all
3. Angry A Great Deal Definitely a little Not at all
4. Sad A Great Deal Definitely a little Not at all
5. Misunderstood A Great Deal Definitely a little Not at all
6. Criticized A Great Deal Definitely a little Not at all
7. Worried A Great Deal Definitely a little Not at all
8. Righteously A Great Deal Definitely a little Not at all
 indignant
9. Unappreciated A Great Deal Definitely a little Not at all
10. Unattractive A Great Deal Definitely a little Not at all
11. Disgusted A Great Deal Definitely a little Not at all
11. Disapproving A Great Deal Definitely a little Not at all
12. Like leaving A Great Deal Definitely a little Not at all
13. Like my opinions A Great Deal Definitely a little Not at all
 didn't matter
14. I had no idea A Great Deal Definitely a little Not at all
 what I was feeling
15. Lonely A Great Deal Definitely a little Not at all
What triggered these feelings?
1. I felt excluded A Great Deal Definitely a little Not at all
2. I was not A Great Deal Definitely a little Not at all
 important to my spouse
3. I felt cold toward A Great Deal Definitely a little Not at all
 my spouse
4. I definitely felt A Great Deal Definitely a little Not at all
 rejected
5. I was criticized A Great Deal Definitely a little Not at all
6. I felt no affection A Great Deal Definitely a little Not at all
 toward my partner
152
7. I felt that my A Great Deal Definitely a little Not at all
partner was not
 attracted to me
8. My sense of A Great Deal Definitely a little Not at all
 dignity was being
 compromised
9. My partner was A Great Deal Definitely a little Not at all
 being domineering
10. I could not A Great Deal Definitely a little Not at all
 persuade my
 partner at all
Now that you know what triggered this episode, it's time to see
whether your emotional reaction is rooted in your past. Look over
your answers to the "Who Am I?" exercise on p. 56. See if you can
find connections there between earlier traumas or behavior and the
current situation. Use the checklist below to facilitate this search for
links between the past and present.
This recent argument was rooted in:
(check all that apply)
_ The way I was treated in my family growing up
_ A previous relationship
_ Past injuries, hard times, or traumas I've suffered
_ My basic fears and insecurities
_ Things and events I have not yet resolved or put aside
_ Unrealized hopes I have
_ Ways other people treated me in the past
_ Things I have always thought about myself
_ Old "nightmares" or "catastrophes" I have worried about
After you've read each other's answers above, you will, I hope,
come to see that we are all complicated creatures whose actions and
reactions are governed by a wide array of perceptions, thoughts,
153
feelings, and mem- cries. In other words, reality is subjective, which
is why your partner's perspective on the argument may be different
from yours without either of you being right or wrong about what
really happened.
It's natural to make the fundamental error of believing that the
fight is all your partner's fault. To break the pattern, you both need to
admit some role (however slight at first) in creating the conflict. In
order to do that, read the following list and circle all that apply to
you and that may have contributed to the argument. (Do not try to do
this until you have calmed down physiologically. Follow the steps for
self-soothing on p. 176 and then let go of thoughts that maintain the
distress: thoughts of feeling misunderstood, righteous indignation, or
innocent victim hood.)
1. I have been very stressed Yes,Definitely Maybe A little
 and irritable lately
2. I have not expressed much Yes,Definitely Maybe A little
 appreciation toward my
 spouse lately
3. I have been overly sensitive lately Yes,Definitely Maybe A little
4. I have been overly critical lately Yes,Definitely Maybe A little
5. I have not shared very much Yes,Definitely Maybe A little
 of my inner world
6. I have been depressed lately Yes,Definitely Maybe A little
7. I would say that I have a chip Yes,Definitely Maybe A little
 on my shoulder lately
8. I have not been very affectionate Yes,Definitely Maybe A little
9. I have not been a very good Yes,Definitely Maybe A little
 listener lately
10. I have been feeling a bit like Yes, Definitely Maybe A little
 a martyr
Overall, my contribution to this mess was:
How can I make this better in the future?
154
What one thing could my partner do next time to avoid this
argument?
If, after working through this exercise, you or your spouse still
find it hard to accept each other's perspective, it may help you to
work together more on the exercises in Chapter 4 (strengthening your
fondness and admiration system). I have found that couples who
have remained happily married for many years are able to enjoy each
other--foibles and all--because of the strength of their fondness and
admiration. Many of the older couples I studied with colleagues Bob
Levenson and Laura Carstensen in the San Francisco Bay Area were
masters at this. They had been married for a very long time--some for
more than forty years. Through the course of their marriages, they
had learned to view their partners' shortcomings and oddities as
amusing parts of the whole package of their spouse's character and
personality.
One wife, for example, accepted with a chuckle that her
husband would never stop being a Dagwood--always running late
and frantic. She found ways around it. Whenever they had to get to
the airport, she'd tell him their plane left thirty minutes sooner than
the actual takeoff time. He knew she was deceiving him, and they
laughed about it. Then there was the husband who looked upon his
wife's weekly shopping sprees with as much amusement as dread,
even though her shopping style made bill-paying very confusing-she
almost always returned about half of her purchases.
Somehow couples such as these have learned to mellow about
their partner's faults. So although they communicate to each other
every emotion in the spectrum, including anger, irritability,
disappointment, and hurt, they also communicate their fundamental
fondness and respect. Whatever issue they are discussing, they give
each other the message that they love and accept each other, "warts
and all."
When couples are not able to do this, sometimes the problem is
that they are unable to forgive each other for past differences. It's all
155
too easy to hold a grudge. For a marriage to go forward happily, you
need to pardon each other and give up on past resentments. This can
be hard to do, but it is well worth it. When you forgive your spouse,
you both benefit. Bitterness is a heavy burden. As Shakespeare wrote
in The Merchant of Venice, mercy is "twice blessed. It blesses him
that gives and him that takes."
156
















157

8
Principle 5: Principle 5:
Solve Your Solvable Problems Solve Your Solvable Problems
It stands to reason that when a husband and wife respect each other
and are open to each other's point of view, they have a good basis for
resolving any differences that arise. And yet too often couples lose
their way when trying to persuade each other or settle
disagreements. A conversation that could have been productive
instead ends in a screaming match or angry silence. If this sounds like
you, and you're certain the problem you want to tackle is indeed
solvable (see Chapter 7), then the key to resolving this difficulty is to
learn a new approach to settling conflict. (The advice offered here
will also be somewhat helpful in coping with gridlocked problems,
but it won't be enough. To break the stranglehold a perpetual
problem has on your marriage, be sure to read about Principle 6,
"Overcome Gridlock," in Chapter 10.)
The popular approach to conflict resolution, advocated by
many marital therapists, is to attempt to put yourself in your
partner's shoes while listening intently to what he or she says, and
then to communicate empathetically that you see the dilemma from
his or her perspective. It's not a bad method--if you can do it. But, as
I've said, many couples can't- including many very happily married
158
couples. Plenty of the people we studied who had enviable, loving
relationships did not follow the experts' rules of communication
when they argued. But they were still able to resolve their conflicts.
By studying intently what these couples did do, I have come up
with a new model for resolving conflict in a loving relationship. My
fifth principle entails the following steps:
1. Soften your startup
2. Learn to make and receive repair attempts
3. Soothe yourself and each other
4. Compromise
5. Be tolerant of each other's faults
These steps take very little "training" because we all pretty
much have these skills already; we just get out of the habit of using
them in our most intimate relationship. To a certain degree, my fifth
principle comes down to having good manners. It means treating
your spouse with the same respect you offer to company. If a guest
leaves an umbrella, we say, "Here. You forgot your umbrella." We
would never think of saying, "What's wrong with you? You are
constantly forgetting things. Be a little more thoughtful, for God's
sake! What am I, your slave to go picking up after you?" We are
sensitive to the guest's feelings, even if things don't go so well. When
a guest spills wine, we say, "No problem. Would you like another
glass?" not, "You just ruined my best tablecloth. I can't depend on you
to do anything right, can I? I will never invite you to my home again."
Remember Dr. Rory, who was so nasty to his wife during their
Christmas Day picnic at the hospital? When a resident phoned, he
was very pleasant to him. This is not an infrequent phenomenon. In
the midst of a bitter dispute, the husband or wife picks up a ringing
telephone and is suddenly all smiles: "Oh, hi. Yes, it would be great
to have lunch. No problem, Tuesday would be fine. Oh, I am so sorry
to hear that you didn't get the job. You must feel so disappointed,"
and so on. Suddenly the angry, rigid spouse has been transformed
into a flexible, rational, understanding, and compassionate beinguntil the phone call is over. Then he or she just as suddenly morphs
159
back into someone scowling and immovable all for the partner's
benefit. It just doesn't have to be that way. Keep in mind, as you
work your way through these steps, that what's really being asked of
you is no more than would be asked if you were dealing with an
acquaintance, much less the person who has vowed to share his or
her life with you.
Step 1: Soften your startup
If there's one similarity between happy and unhappy marriages, it's
that in both circumstances the wife is far more likely than the
husband to bring up a touchy issue and to push to resolve it. But
there's a dramatic difference in how the wife brings it up. Remember
Dara, who lit into her husband, Oliver, as soon as they began
discussing housework? Within a minute she was being sarcastic and
batting down every suggestion he made: "Do you think you really
work well with lists?" and "I think you do a pretty good job of
coming home and lying around and disappearing into the bathroom."
Compare Dara's harsh approach with that of Justine, who is
happily married to Michael but has the same problem: He doesn't do
his share around the house. What bugs her the most is that she
always ends up folding the laundry, which she hates. Here's what
she says in the Love Lab, when she broaches the topic with Michael.
Justine: Okay (deep breath). Housework.
Michael: Yeah. Well, I mean I definitely clean off the counters in the
kitchen and the table whenever we do stuff. (Defensive) this tine:
Hm-hmm. You do. ( Repair attempt)
Michael: Hm-hmm. (He's relaxed; Justine's repair attempt was
successful.) Justine: I think it's just, like, sometimes when things
are just kind of left, or the laundry just piles up ... (Softened
startup)
Michael: Yeah. I haven't even been thinking about laundry (laughs). I
mean, I just haven't been thinking about it at all. (Not defensive)
160
Justine (laughs): That's kind of cute. Who do you think's doing it?
You keep having clothes to wear.
Michael: Yeah, I guess.
Justine: And maybe that's okay. But it just gets to me after a while.
Michael: Well, it hasn't even crossed my mind that, like, we have to
do the laundry. (Chuckles.)
Justine: Actually, Tim's been folding them. (A neighbor in their
apartment complex-the washer and dryer are in a communal laundry
room.) I left a load in, and then when I passed by, the sheets
were folded.
Michael: Maybe we should put our hamper in his room?
Justine (laughs): (Shared humor deescalates tension and lowers heart rates.)
Michael: So, okay, like maybe every other day or something when I
first get back home from work…
Justine: Yeah, you could fold what makes sense, especially towels
and underwear and the sheets…
Michael: Yeah, I'll just look in the basket. (He is accepting her
influence.)
Justine: Okay
Perhaps the most important quality of this exchange is the
virtual absence of the Four Horsemen of the Apocalypse--criticism,
contempt, defensiveness, and stonewalling- those hallmarks of
marriage-harming conflict. The reason for their absence is that
Justine's startup is soft. In contrast, a harsh startup usually begins the
cycle of the four horsemen, which leads to flooding and, in turn,
increased emotional distance and loneliness that lets the marriage
wither. Only 40 percent of the time do couples divorce because they
are having frequent, devastating fights. More often marriages end
because, to avoid constant skirmishes, husband and wife distance
themselves so much that their friendship and sense of connection are
lost.
That's why it's so important that when Michael admits that he
doesn't even think about the laundry, Justine doesn't get critical or
contemptuous. She laughs and says she thinks that's "cute."
161
Because Justine is gentle with Michael, their conversation actually
produces a result: They come up with a plan to resolve the conflict.
Since they are able to do this, their discussion leaves them feeling
positive about themselves and their marriage. That feeling is "money
in the bank" for any couple--it inspires an optimistic attitude that will
help them resolve the next conflict that comes along.
In another happy marriage, the big issue is that the wife,
Andrea, wants her husband, Dave, to become more involved with the
church. But she hardly bangs him over the head with a Bible. Instead
she says, "Going to church is not something I need every day. But it's
a comfort." Then she tells him, "I don't like you going just because of
me." By the time she tells him directly, "I want a little bit more
involvement from you than just Easter, Christmas, and Mother's Day"
he is ready to compromise. "Okay I'll go to church on big important
days and…maybe some Sundays."
A soft startup doesn't necessarily have to be this diplomatic. It
just has to be devoid of criticism or contempt. In a healthy, volatile
marriage, which can be very confrontational, the wife is more likely
to say something like "Hey, I know I can be a slob sometimes myself,
but I'm really angry that you walked by the laundry basket last night
without stopping to fold any sheets. I didn't like having to fold them
all myself." Or: "I feel really strongly that we need to go to church
together more often. This is very important to me." These are soft
startups because they are direct complaints rather than criticisms or
contemptuous accusations.
Softening the startup is crucial to resolving conflicts because,
my research finds, discussions invariably end on the same note they
begin. That's why 96 percent of the time I can predict the fate of a
conflict discussion in the first three minutes! If you start an argument
harshly--meaning you attack your spouse verbally-you'll end up with
at least as much tension as you began. But if you use a softened
startup--meaning you complain but don't criticize or otherwise attack
your spouse--the discussion is likely to be productive. And if most of
your arguments start softly, your marriage is likely to be stable and
happy.
Although either spouse can be responsible for a harsh startup,
we've found that the vast majority of the time the culprit is the wife.
162
This is because in our culture the wife is far more likely than her
husband to bring up difficult issues and push to get them resolved.
Husbands are more likely to try to distance themselves from hard toface concerns. As I've noted, there are physiological reasons for this
gender gap. Men tend to experience flooding much more easily
because their bodies are more reactive to emotional stress than their
wives'. So they are more inclined to avoid confrontation.
Harsh Startup Questionnaire
To get a sense of whether harsh startup is a problem in your
marriage, answer the following questions.
Read each statement and circle T for "true" or F for "false."
When we begin to discuss our marital issues:
1. My partner is often very critical of me. T F
2. I hate the way my partner raises an issue. T F
3. Arguments often seem to come out of nowhere. T F
4. Before I know it, we are in a fight. T F
5. When my partner complains, I feel picked on. T F
6. I seem to always get blamed for issues. T F
7. My partner is negative all out of proportion. T F
8. I feel I have to ward off personal attacks. T F
9. I often have to deny charges leveled against me. T F
10. My partner's feelings are too easily hurt. T F
11. What goes wrong is often not my responsibility. T F
12. My spouse criticizes my personality T F
13. Issues get raised in an insulting manner. T F
14. My partner will at times complain in a smug or superior way. T F
15. I have just about had it with all this negativity between us. T F
16. I feel basically disrespected when my partner complains. T F
17. I just want to leave the scene when complaints arise. T F
163
18. Our calm is suddenly shattered. T F
19. I find my partner's negativity unnerving and unsettling, T F
20. I think my partner can be totally irrational. T F
Scoring: Give yourself one point for each "true" answer.
Under 5: This is an area of strength in your marriage. You and your
spouse initiate difficult discussions with each other gently--without
being critical or contemptuous. Because you avoid being harsh, your
chances of resolving your conflict or learning to manage it
successfully together are dramatically increased.
5 or above: Your marriage could stand some improvement in this
area. Your score suggests that when you address areas of
disagreement with your spouse, one of you tends to be harsh. That
means you immediately trot out at least one of the four horsemen,
which automatically prevents the issue from being resolved.
Although the wife is usually responsible for a harsh startup, the
secret to avoiding it is for both of you to work together on the first
four principles. Do this, and the wife's startup softens as a matter of
course. So if your spouse tends to raise issues harshly, the best advice
I can give is to make sure she (or he) is feeling known, respected, and
loved by you, and that you accept her influence. Harsh startup is
often a reaction that sets in when a wife feels her husband doesn't
respond to her low-level complaints or irritability. So if you comply
with a minor request like "It's your turn to take out the garbage,
please," you avoid having the situation escalate into "What the hell is
wrong with you? Are you deaf? Take out the damn garbage!"
If you are the one most responsible for harsh startups in your
relationship, I can't emphasize enough how important it is to the fate
of your marriage to soften up. Remember: If you go straight for the
jugular, you're going to draw plenty of blood. The result will be war
or retreat on your partner's part, rather than any kind of meaningful,
productive discussion. If you're angry with your spouse, it's worth
taking a deep breath and thinking through how to broach the subject
before leaping in. It will be easier to do this if you constantly remind
yourself that by being gentle, you are more likely to resolve the
164
conflict. If you feel too angry to discuss the matter gently, your best
option is not to discuss it at all until you've calmed down. Follow the
steps for self-soothing on page 176 before talking it out with your
spouse.
Here are some suggestions to ensure that your startup is soft:
Complain but don't blame. Let's assume that you're angry because
your spouse insisted on buying a dog despite your reservations. He
swore up and down that he'd clean up after the dog. But now you're
finding poop all over the yard whenever you take out the garbage.
It's certainly okay to complain. You could say something like "Hey
there's poop all over the backyard. We agreed you'd clean up after
Banjo. I'm really upset about this." While this is confrontational, it's
not an attack. You're simply complaining about a particular situation,
not your partner's personality or character.
What's not okay is to say something like "Hey, there's poop all
over the backyard. This is all your fault. I just knew you'd be
irresponsible about that dog. I should never have trusted you about it
in the first place." However justified you may feel in blaming your
spouse, the bottom line is that this approach is not productive.
Even if it does lead your partner to clean up the yard, it also leads to
increased tension, resentment, defensiveness, and so on.
Make statements that start with "I" instead of "You". “I” statements
have been a staple of interpersonal psychology ever since the mid1960s, when acclaimed psychologist Harm Ginott noted that phrases
starting with / are usually less likely to be critical and to make the
listener defensive than statements starting with you. You can see the
difference:
"You are not listening to me," versus "I would like it if you'd listen to
me."
"You are careless with money," versus "I want us to save more."
"You just don't care about me," versus "I'm feeling neglected."
165
Clearly, the "I" statements above are gentler than their "You"
counterparts. Of course, you can also buck this general rule and come
up with "I" statements like "I think you are selfish" that are hardly
gentle. So the point is not to start talking to your spouse in some
stilted psycho babble. Just keep in mind that if your words focus on
how you're feeling rather than on accusing your spouse, your
discussion will be far more successful.
Describe what is happening, don't evaluate or Judge. Instead of
accusing or blaming, just describe what you see. Instead of "You
never watch the baby" say "I seem to be the only one chasing after
Charlie today" Again, this will help prevent your spouse from feeling
attacked and waging a defense rather than really considering your
point.
Be clear. Don't expect your partner to be a mind reader. Instead of
"You left the dining room a total mess," say, "I'd appreciate it if you
would clean your stuff off the dining room table." Instead of "Would
you take care of the baby for once?" say, "Please change Emmy's
diaper and give her a bottle."
Be polite. Add phrases such as "please" and "I would appreciate it
if..."
Be appreciative. If your partner has, at some point, handled this
situation better, then couch your request within an appreciation of
what your partner did right in the past and how much you miss that
now. Instead of "You never have time for me anymore," say,
"Remember how we used to go out every Saturday night? I loved
spending so much time alone with you. And it felt so good knowing
that you wanted to be with me, too. Let's start doing that again."
Don't store things up. It's hard to be gentle when you're ready to
burst with recriminations. So don't wait too long before bringing up
an issue--otherwise it will just escalate in your mind. As the Bible
says (Ephesians 4:26), "Let not the sun go down upon your wrath." To
166
see how all of these steps combine to create a softened startup,
compare what Iris says in the following two dialogues:
Harsh Startup
Iris: Another Saturday, and once again I'm spending my free time
picking up after you. The trouble with you, Richard, is that. . .
(Criticism, blame)
Richard: Yep, here we go again. "The trouble with you, Richard, the
trouble with you, Richard." There's nothing wrong with me!
Iris: Then why do I always have to tell you what to do? Never mind,
I've finished cleaning up your stuff anyway, or were you too
busy reading the Sunday paper to notice? (Contempt)
Richard: Look, I hate cleaning up. I know you do, too. I've been
thinking about what we should do. (Repair attempt)
Iris: This I've got to hear. (More contempt)
Richard: Well, actually I was thinking that we could use a vacation.
Wouldn't it be nice for you to be waited on hand and foot? (Second
repair attempt)
Iris: Come on, we can't afford a cleaning lady, much less a vacation
like that.
Softened Startup
Iris: This house is an incredible mess, and we're having company
tonight. (Describing) I am really upset that I am doing all this
cleaning, alone, on a Saturday. ("I" statement) Come on, please
help me. Maybe you could do the vacuuming? (Being clear)
Richard: All right. I hate cleaning up, but I guess vacuuming is the
best of the worst. I'll do the bathrooms, too.
Iris: That'd be a big help. (Appreciation) Thank you. (Politeness)
Richard: When we're done, we deserve a reward--let's go out for
lunch.
Iris: Okay
167
When you switch to a soft startup, your spouse may not
automatically react so sweetly. He or she may still be anticipating
criticism or contempt from you and therefore respond negatively.
Don't give up or fall into the trap of then escalating the conflict.
Continue to broach the topic gently, and eventually you will see a
change in how your spouse responds, especially if you are working
on all of the other aspects of Principle 5 together.
Here are some other examples that illustrate the difference
between a harsh startup and a softened alternative:
Harsh startup: You never touch me.
Softened alternative: I loved it when you kissed me in the kitchen the
other day. You are a natural-born kisser. Let's do that some more.
Harsh startup: I see you dented the car again. When are you going to
stop being so reckless?
Softened alternative: I saw that new dent. What happened? I am
really getting worried about your driving, and I want you to be
safe. Can we talk about this?
Harsh startup: You always ignore me!
Softened alternative: I have been missing you lately, and I'm getting
a little lonely.

Exercise 1: Softened Startup
Now test your own ability to soften a harsh startup. For each item
below, supply a softened alternative. (Sample answers follow, but try
not to peek.)
1. When your mother-in-law visits tonight, you plan to tell her how
much it hurts you when she criticizes your parenting skills, you want
your partner, who is very defensive when it comes to Mom, to back
you up.
Harsh startup: I can't stand it when your mother comes over.
Your softened alternative:
168
2. You wish that your partner would cook dinner tomorrow night or
take you out to dinner.
Harsh startup: You never take me anywhere. I'm sick of doing
all the cooking.
Your softened alternative:
3. You think that your partner spends too much time with other
people instead of you when you go to parties. Tonight, you want
your partner to stick by you.
Harsh startup: I just know that tonight you're gonna be flirting
shamelessly again at the party.
Your softened alternative:
4. You're upset that you have not made love in some time. You're
feeling unsure that your partner finds you attractive. You wish that
the two of you could make love tonight.
Harsh startup: You're always so cold to me!
Your softened alternative:
5. You want your partner to ask for a raise.
Harsh startup: You're too wimpy to get a raise for your own
family
Your softened alternative:
169
6. You want to do more fun things together on the weekends.
Harsh startup: You have no idea how to have a good time.
You're a workaholic.
Your softened alternative:
7. You wish that the two of you could save more money.
Harsh startup: You don't have a clue about how to manage
money.
Your softened alternative:
8. You wish your partner would spend more money buying you
surprise presents.
Harsh startup: When was the last time you bought me
anything?
Your softened alternative:
Sa,ple Answers
1. I'm worried that your mom is going to be critical of me tonight and
that you won't back me up.
2. I'm tired of cooking. It'd be real nice if you took me out.
3. I'm feeling very shy tonight again. Please spend time with me and
make it easier for me to talk to other people. You're so good at that.
4. I'm really missing you lately; you know how much you turn me on.
Let's make love!
5. It would be great if you could get a raise soon. What if we talked
about a plan for getting one?
170
6. I really want to spend some fun time with you this weekend. How
about not working and let's do something fun together? There's a
great movie I'd really like to see.
7. I'm feeling anxious about our savings. Let's come up with a savings
plan, okay?
8. I'm feeling very deprived lately, and I would love it if we surprised
each other with a present out of the blue this week. What do you
think?
Step 2: Learn to make and receive
repair attempts
When you take driving lessons, the first thing you're taught is how to
stop the car. Putting on the brakes is an important skill in a marriage,
too. When your discussion starts off on the wrong foot, or you find
yourself in an endless cycle of recriminations, you can prevent a
disaster if you know how to stop. I call these brakes repair attempts.
When Michael gets defensive and says, "I definitely clean off
the counters in the kitchen and the table whenever we do stuff,"
Justine doesn't immediately discount his point. "Hm-hmm, you do,"
she says. This is a repair attempt. It deescalates the tension so that
Michael is more receptive to finding a compromise. What separates
stable, emotionally intelligent marriages from others is not that their
repair attempts are necessarily more skillful or better thought out,
but that their repair attempts get through to their spouse. This is
because the air between them hasn't been clouded by a lot of
negativity.
Repair Attempts Questionnaire
To assess the effectiveness of repair attempts in your own
relationship, answer the following.
Read each statement and circle T for "true" or F for "false."
171
During our attempts to resolve conflict:
 1. We are good at taking breaks when we need them. T F
 2. My partner usually accepts my apologies. T F
 3. I can say that I am wrong. T F
 4. I am pretty good at calming myself down. T F
 5. We can maintain a sense of humor. T F
 6. When my partner says we should talk to each other in a different
way it usually makes a lot of sense. T F
 7. My attempts to repair our discussions when they get negative
are usually effective. T F
 8. We are pretty good listeners even when we have different
positions on things. T F
 9. If things get heated, we can usually pull out of it and change
things. I F
10. My spouse is good at soothing me when I get upset. T F
11. I feel confident that we can resolve most issues between us. T F
12. When I comment on how we could communicate better my
spouse listens to me. T F
13. Even if things get hard at times I know we can get past our
differences T F
14. We can be affectionate even when we are disagreeing. T F
15. Teasing and humor usually work to get my spouse over
negativity. T F
16. We can start all over again and improve our discussion when we
need to T F
17. When emotions run hot, expressing how upset I feel makes a real
difference, T F
18. We can discuss even big differences between us. T F
19. My partner expresses appreciation for nice things do. T F
20. If I keep trying to communicate it will eventually work. T F
Scoring: Give yourself one point for each "true" answer.
6 or above: This is an area of strength in your marriage. When marital
discussions are at risk of getting out of hand, you are able to put on
the brakes and effectively calm each other down,
172
Below 6: Your marriage could stand some improvement in this area.
By learning how to repair your interactions when negativity engulfs
you, you can dramatically improve the effectiveness of your problem
solving and develop a more positive perspective of each other and
your marriage.
Getting the message through
As I said, the key factor in whether a repair attempt is effective is the
state of the relationship. In happy marriages, couples send and
receive repair attempts with ease. In unhappy ones, even the most
eloquent repair attempt can fall on deaf ears. But now that you know
this, you can "buck the system." You don't have to wait for your
marriage to improve before you start hearing each other's repair
attempts. Start now by focusing intently on these "brakes" and
training each other to recognize when one is sent your way. Do this,
and you can pull yourselves out of the downward cycle of negativity.
Your future together can be bright even if your Your future together can be bright even if your
disagreements tend to be very negative. The secret
is learning the right kind of damage control. is learning the right kind of damage control.
One reason couples miss each other's repair attempts is that
they don't always come sugarcoated. If your spouse yells, "You're
getting off the topic!" or grumbles, "Can we take a break?" that's a
repair attempt despite the negative delivery. If you listen to your
partner's tone rather than the words, you could miss his real
message, which is "Stop! This is getting out of hand." Because repair
attempts can be difficult to hear if your relationship is engulfed in
negativity, the best strategy is to make your attempts obviously
formal in order to emphasize them. Below you'll find a long list of
scripted phrases.These are specific words you can say to your spouse
to deescalate the tension. By using them when arguments get too
negative, you'll be able to keep your discussions from spiraling out of
control. Some couples even copy this list and stick it on their
refrigerator for handy reference.
173
Many, if not all, of these phrases probably sound phony and
unnatural to you right now. That's because they offer a very different
way of speaking with your spouse when you're upset. But their
phoniness is not a reason to reject them. If you learned a better and
more effective way to hold your tennis racket, it would feel "wrong"
and "unnatural" initially, simply because you weren't used to it yet.
The same goes for these repair attempts. Over time they'll come
easily to you, and you'll modify them to more closely suit your style
of speech and personality
I Feel
1. I'm getting scared.
2. Please say that more gently
3. Did I do something wrong?
4. That hurt my feelings.
5. That felt like an insult.
6. I'm feeling sad.
7. I feel blamed. Can you rephrase that?
8. I'm feeling unappreciated.
9. Feel defensive. Can you rephrase that?
10. Please don't lecture me.
11. Don’t feel like you understand me right now.
12. I am starting to feel Hooded.
13. Feel criticized. Can you rephrase that?
14. I'm getting worried
I Need to Calm Down
1. Can you make things safer for me?
2. I need things to be calmer right now.
3. I need your support right now.
4. Just listen to me right now and try to understand.
5. Tell me you love me.
6. Can I have a kiss?
7. Can I take that back?
174
8. Please be gentler with me.
9. Please help me calm down.
10. Please be quiet and listen to me.
11. This is important to me. Please listen.
12. I need to finish what I was saying.
13. I am starting to feel flooded.
14. I feel criticized. Can you rephrase that?
15. Can we take a break?
Sorry
1. My reactions were too extreme. Sorry.
2. I really blew that one.
3. Let me try again.
4. I want to be gentler to you right now, and I don't know how.
5. Tell me what you hear me saying.
6. I can see my part in all this.
7. How can I make things better?
8. Let's try that over again.
9. What you are saying is...
10. Let me start again in a softer way.
11. I'm sorry. Please forgive me.
Get to Jes
1. You're starting to convince me.
2. I agree with part of what you're saying.
3. Let's compromise here.
4. Let's find our common ground.
5. I never thought of things that way
6. This problem is not very serious in the big picture.
7. I think your point of view makes sense.
8. Let's agree to include both our views in a solution.
9. I am thankful for . . .
10. One thing I admire about you is...
11. I see what you're talking about.
175
Stop Action!
1. I might be wrong here.
2. Please, let's stop for a while.
3. Let's take a break.
4. Give me a moment. I'll be back.
5. I'm feeling flooded.
6. Please stop.
7. Let's agree to disagree here.
8. Let's start all over again.
9.Hang in there. Don’t withdraw.
10.I want to change the topic.
11.We are getting off track.
I Appreciate
1. I know this isn’t your fault.
2. My part of this problem is…
3. I see your point.
4. Thank you for…
5. That’s good point.
6. We are both saying…
7. I understand.
8. I love you.
9. I am thankful for…
10.One thing I admire about you is…
11.This is not your problem, it’s our problem.
Formalizing repair attempts by using these scripted phrases can
help you defuse arguments in two ways. First, the formality of a
script ensures that you will use the type of words that work well for
putting on the brakes. Second, these phrases are like megaphonesthey help ensure that you pay attention to a repair attempt when
you're on the receiving end.
Now it's time to use the above checklist to help you resolve an
issue in your marriage. Choose a low-intensity conflict to discuss.
176
Each of you gets to talk for fifteen minutes. Make sure you both use
at least one phrase from the list of phrases during the
discussion.Announce to your partner beforehand that you're about to
make a repair attempt. You can even refer to the attempt by number,
as in, "I'm making repair attempt number six under / Feel: "I'm
feeling sad.""
When your partner announces a repair attempt, your job is
simply to try to accept it. View the interruption as a bid to make
things better. Accept the attempt in the spirit in which it was
intended. This entails accepting your partner's influence. For
example, if he or she says, "I need to finish what I'm saying,"
acknowledge that need and then encourage your partner to keep
talking to you. As you continue to use the list in your conversations,
eventually you might consider replacing it with some other ritual,
like raising your hand and announcing point-blank, "This is a repair
attempt!" Or you may come up with other effective repairs that better
fit your personality and relationship. For example, a couple we know
say "clip clop" to each other if one of them introduces one of the four
horsemen into a discussion. The humor in this repair helps defuse the
negativity all the more.
Step 3: soothe yourself and each other

While Justine is in the middle of discussing laundry with Michael, he
does something that seems incidental but really has great significance
for their chances of a happy future: He yawns. Cleaning house is not
the most fascinating subject, but Michael doesn’t yawn because
Justine is boring him. He yawns because he is relaxed. When you’re
feeling angry or anxious, yawning is just about the least likely
physiological reaction you’re going to have. Michael’s yawn is like an
announcement that he’s feeling soothed by Justine, even though she’s
discussing an area of conflict. Because no alarms are going off in his
body (or mind), he is able to discuss housework and reach a
compromise with Justine easily.
177
It is harder for a man’ It is harder for a man’s body to calm down s body to calm down s body to calm down
after an argument than a after an argument than awoman’s.
In less stable marriages, however, conflict discussions can lead
to the opposite reaction—they can trigger flooding. When this occurs,
you feel overwhelmed both emotionally and physically. Most likely
you think thoughts of righteous indignation (“I don’t have to take
this anymore”) or innocent victim hood (“Why is she always picking
on me?”). Meanwhile, your body is in distress. Usually your heart is
pounding, you’re sweating, you’re holding your breath.
I have found that in the vast majority of cases, when one spouse
does not “get” the other’s repair attempt, it’s because the listener is
flooded and therefore can’t really hear what the spouse is saying.
When you’re in this condition, the most thoughtful repair attempt in
the world won’t benefit your marriage.
Flooding Questionnaire

To discover whether flooding is a significant problem in your
relationship, answer the following questions:
Read each statement and circle T for "true" or F for "false."
1. Our discussions get too heated. T F
2. have a hard time calming down. T F
3. One of us is going to say something we will regret. T F
4. My partner gets too upset. T F
5. After a fight want to keep my distance. T F
6. My partner yells unnecessarily T F
7. I feel overwhelmed by our arguments, T F
8. I can't think straight when my partner gets hostile. T F
9. Why can't we talk more logically? T F
10. My partner's negativity often comes out of nowhere. T F
11.There's often no stopping my partner's temper. T F
12. I feel like running away during our fights, T F
13. Small issues suddenly become big ones. T F
178
14. I can't calm down very easily during an argument. T F
15. My partner has a long list of unreasonable demands. T F
Scoring: Give yourself one point for each "true" answer.
Below 6: This is an area of strength in your marriage. You are
able to confront differences of opinion with your spouse without
feeling overwhelmed. This means that you are not feeling victimized
or hostile toward your spouse during disagreements. That's good
news since it indicates that you are able to communicate with each
other without negativity getting out of hand. As a result, you're
better able to resolve conflicts (and avoid gridlock over issues that are
un resolvable).
6 or above: Your marriage could stand some improvement in
this area. Your score suggests that you tend to get flooded during
arguments with your spouse. When this occurs, any likelihood that
the problem can be resolved ceases. You are feeling too agitated to
really hear what your spouse is saying or to learn any helpful
conflict-resolution skills. Read on to find out how to cope with this
problem.
Exercise 2: Self-Soothing
The first step is to stop the discussion. If you keep going, you'll find
yourself exploding at your spouse or imploding (stonewalling),
neither of which will get you anywhere other than one step farther
down the marital cascades that lead to divorce. The only reasonable
strategy, therefore, is to let your spouse know that you're feeling
flooded and need to take a break. That break should last at least
twenty minutes, since it will be that long before your body calms
down. It's crucial that during this time you avoid thoughts of
righteous indignation and innocent victim hood. Spend your time
doing something soothing and distracting, like listening to music or
exercising.
Many people find that the best approach to self-soothing is to
focus on calming the body through a meditative technique. Here's a
simple one:
1. Sit in a comfortable chair, or lie on your back on the floor.
179
2. Focus on controlling your breathing. Usually when you get
flooded, you either hold your breath a lot or breathe shallowly. So close
your eyes and focus on taking deep, regular breaths.
3. Relax your muscles. One at a time, tightly squeeze the muscle
groups that seem tense (usually, your forehead and jaw, neck, shoulders,
arms, and back). Hold for two seconds, then release.
4. Let the tension flow out of each muscle group, and get that muscle
group to feel heavy by imagining that it is.
5. Let the tension flow out of each (now-heavy) muscle group, and
get that muscle group to feel warm. One way is to keep your eyes closed
and focus on one calming vision or idea. Many people find it effective to
think of a place they associate with calmness, like a forest, a lake, or a
beach. Imagine this place as vividly as you can. Keep focused on this
calming vision for about thirty seconds.
6. Find a personal image that brings all of this soothing to mind. For
example, I think of a place I know on Orca Island in Washington State,
where the loudest sound is the wind rustling the trees as young eagles
residing in a nearby rookery soar by. Conjuring that image relaxes me and
automatically triggers all of the other steps of self-soothing.
I think taking a break of this sort is so important that I schedule
this exercise into the conflict-resolution section of every workshop I
run. Invariably I get the same response from participants. At first,
they moan and groan about being forced to relax. Some are quite
cynical about relaxation exercises and can't see how closing their eyes
and thinking about a lake can help cure their marital woes. And yet
once they do the exercise, they realize how powerful and helpful it
really is. Suddenly everybody in the room relaxes. You can see the
difference in how couples relate to each other.Their voices get softer;
there is more chuckling. Soothing themselves has made them better
able to work on their conflicts as a team rather than as adversaries.
In one of our latest experiments, we interrupted couples after
fifteen minutes and told them we needed to adjust the equipment.
We asked them not to talk about their issue, but just to read
magazines for half an hour. When they started talking about their
issue again, their heart rates were significantly lower and their
interaction more productive.
180
Exercise 3: Soothing Each Other
Once you've calmed yourself, you can benefit your marriage
enormously if you then take some time to calm each other. Obviously
this can be quite difficult to do if you're feeling very angry or hurt.
But the results can be so impressive that it's worth trying. Remember:
Only do this after you've already spent twenty minutes calming
down on your own.
Soothing your partner is of enormous benefit to a marriage
because it's really a form of reverse conditioning. In other words, if
you frequently have the experience of being calmed by your spouse,
you will stop seeing your partner as a trigger of stress in your life and
instead associate him or her with feeling relaxed. This automatically
increases the positivity in your relationship.
To comfort each other, you first need to talk earnestly about
flooding.
Ask yourself and each other these questions:
• What makes me (you) feel flooded?
• How do I (you) typically bring up issues or irritability or
complaints?
• Do I (you) store things up?
• Is there anything I can do that soothes you?
• Is there anything you can do that soothes me?
• What signals can we develop for letting the other know when
we feel flooded? Can we take breaks?
If your heart rate exceeds 100 beats per minute you
won't be able to won't be able tohear what your spouse is trying to hear what your spouse is trying to hear what your spouse is trying to
tell you no matter how hard you try. tell you no matter how hard you try.Take a twenty Take a twenty Take a twentyminute break before continuing. minute break before continuing.
There are many different ways to calm your spouse. What
matters most is that your partner determines the method and enjoys
it. Some couples find massage the perfect antidote to a stressful
discussion. Another helpful technique is to take turns guiding each
other through a meditation like the one described on pages 178-179.
Think of it as a verbal massage. You can even write an elaborate
181
script in which you have your spouse tighten and relax different
muscle groups and then visualize a calm, beautiful scene that brings
him or her pleasure. You can tape-record your rendition for future
use--perhaps give it to your spouse as a special gift. You don't need
to wait for a tense situation to use this exercise. Soothing each other
regularly is a wonderful way to prevent future flooding and
generally enrich your marriage.
Step 4: compromise
Like it or not, the only solution to marital problems is to find a
compromise. In an intimate, loving relationship it just doesn't work
for either of you to get things all your way, even if you're convinced
that you're right. This approach would create such inequity and
unfairness that the marriage would suffer.
Usually, though both partners do make an earnest effort to
compromise on issues, they fail because they go about trying to
compromise in the wrong way. Negotiation is possible only after
you've followed the steps above--softening startup, repairing your
discussion, and keeping calm. These prime you for compromise by
getting you into a positive mode.
Before you try to resolve a conflict, remember that the
cornerstone of any compromise is the fourth principle of marriageaccepting influence. This means that for a compromise to work, you
can't have a closed mind to your spouse's opinions and desires. You
don't have to agree with everything your spouse says or believes, but
you have to be honestly open to considering his or her position.
That's what accepting influence is really all about. If you find
yourself sitting with your arms folded and shaking your head no (or
just thinking it) when your spouse is trying to talk out a problem
with you, your discussion will never get anywhere.
As I've said, men have a harder time accepting influence from
their wives than vice versa. But whatever your gender, an inability to
be open minded is a real liability when it comes to conflict resolution.
So if you haven't already, work through the exercises in Chapter 6.
Realize that it may take time and continued self-awareness to break
182
out of this tendency. Your spouse can assist you in seeing things from
his or her perspective. Ask your spouse questions to help you see his
or her point of view. Remember to search for the part of your
spouse's perspective that, by objective standards, is reasonable.
Once you're ready, there's nothing magical about finding a
solution you both can live with. Often compromise is just a matter of
talking out your differences and preferences in a systematic way This
is not difficult to do as long as you continue to follow the steps above
to prevent your discussion from becoming overwhelmingly negative.
Exercise 4: Finding Common Ground
Decide together which solvable problem you want to tackle. Then sit
separately and think about the problem. On a piece of paper, draw
two circles--a smaller one inside a larger one. In the inner circle make
a list of the aspects of the problem you can't give in on. In the outer
circle list all of the aspects of the problem you can compromise about.
Remember the aikido principle of yielding to win--the more able you
are to compromise, the better able you'll be to persuade your spouse.
So try hard to make your outer circle as large as possible and your
inner circle as small as possible.
Here are the inner and outer circles of a couple named
Raymond and Carol, who were both dissatisfied with their sex life.
Raymond
Inner Circle:
1. I want sex to be more erotic.
2. I want there to be fantasy play with you wearing very sexy
lingerie.
Outer Circle:
1. I can compromise on whether to have sex in the morning or at
night even when 'm tired.
2. I can compromise on our talking during sex,
183
Carol
Inner Circle:
1.want to feel like we're making love when we're having sex.
2. I want Raymond to hold me and stroke me a lot. I want a lot of
foreplay.
Outer Circle:
1. I prefer to have sex at night because I love falling asleep in your
arms afterward, but sex in the morning would be okay too.
2. Talking to me a lot while we make love is nice, but I can
compromise on this too.
Once you've filled in your circles (your lists may be much
longer than Raymond's and Carol's), come back and share them with
each other. Look for common bases of agreement. Remember as you
discuss this to make use of all the other problem-solving strategies
outlined in this chapter-namely, softened startup and soothing
yourself or each other if flooding occurs.
In the case of Carol and Raymond, their inner circles are very
different, but they are not incompatible. Once they accept and respect
their sexual differences, they can create lovemaking sessions that
incorporate his desire for erotic fantasy with her longing for intimacy
and lots of touching. And although their outer circles are in
opposition as well, they are willing to give in these areas, so
compromise should be easy. Maybe they'll decide to switch off with
morning and evening sex depending on how tired Raymond is. And
they can vary how much they speak during sex as well.
The goal of this circle exercise is to try to develop a common
way of thinking about the issue so that you work together to
construct a real plan that you can both live with. As you share your
circles, ask yourselves the following questions:
1. What do we agree about?
2. What are our common feelings or the most important feelings here?
3. What common goals can we have here?
4. How can we understand this situation, this issue?
5. How do we think these goals should be accomplished?
184
Most likely if you're grappling with a solvable problem, following
these steps will lead you to find a reasonable compromise. Once you do,
try out the solution for an agreed-upon time before revisiting it and
deciding if it's working. If it's not, begin the process again and work
together to resolve it.
From time to time it's a good idea to recharge your
compromising skills by focusing together on solving a problem that
is not related to your marital issues. What follows is a fun exercise
that will give you practice in coming to consensus decisions by
working as a team and giving and accepting influence.
Exercise 5: Paper Tower
This exercise is especially fun to do with other couples. Consider
having a paper tower party or contest where each couple is a separate
team. You can take turns being builders and score keepers.
Your mission: Build a free-standing paper tower using the
supplies listed below. The goal is to build the highest, most stable,
and most beautiful tower you can. You may have very different ideas
about how to go about this, so remember to work out your
differences of opinion using the compromise approach described in
this chapter. During this exercise try to be a team. Try both to give
and to accept influence. Include your partner. Ask questions. Take
about half an hour for this task. The finished product should not
adhere exactly to either of your visions but should include both of
them.When you're finished, have a third party (or another couple)
score your tower. No doubt the scoring will be highly subjective since
it values creativity more than engineering prowess. But your final
score is beside the point, which is to have fun building your tower
together. When you're finished you'll have created a monument to
your marriage and your enhanced compromising skills.
Supplies
 I Sunday newspaper Crayons
 Ball of string Colored cellophane
185
 Scotch tape Construction paper
 Stapler Cardboard pieces
 Markers
Score: Have a third party (or another couple) score your tower. The
top score is 90. You get:
Up to 20 points for height
Up to 20 points for strength (stability)
Up to 50 points for beauty and originality.
Step 5: be tolerant OF each other's faults
Too often, a marriage gets bogged down in "if on lies." If only your
spouse were taller, richer, smarter, neater, or sexier, all of your
problems would vanish. As long as this attitude prevails, conflicts
will be very difficult to resolve. Until you accept your partner's flaws
and foibles, you will not be able to compromise successfully. Instead,
you will be on a relentless campaign to alter your spouse. Conflict
resolution is not about one person changing, it's about negotiating,
finding common ground and ways that you can accommodate each
other.
When you have mastered the general problem-solving skills
outlined in this chapter, you'll find that many of your problems find
their own solutions. Once you get past the barriers that have
prevented clear communication, difficulties are easy to resolve. In
fact, the next chapter offers some creative and simple solutions to
some of the most common conflicts couples face--money, sex,
housework, kids, work stress. But remember: These solutions work
only for problems that can be solved. If compromise still seems like a
distant goal to you, then the problem you are grappling with may not
be solvable after all. That means it's time to turn to the advice on
coping with perpetual problems in Chapter 10.
186
















187
9
Coping with Typical Coping with Typical
Solvable Problems Solvable Problems
Work stress, in-laws, money, sex, housework, a new baby: These are
the most typical areas of marital conflict, so there's a good chance at
least some of them are hot buttons in your relationship. Even in very
happy and stable marriages, these issues are perennials. Although
every relationship is different, there's a reason why these particular
conflicts are so common: They touch upon some of the marriage's
most important work.
Many people pay lip service to the notion that a good marriage
takes "work." But what specifically does this mean? Every marriage is
faced with certain emotional tasks that husband and wife need to
accomplish together for the marriage to grow and deepen. These
tasks come down to attaining a rich understanding between husband
and wife. A marriage needs this understanding in order for both
people to feel safe and secure in it. When these tasks are not
accomplished, the marriage feels not like a port in the storm of life
but just another storm.
When there's conflict in one of these six common areas, usually
it's because husband and wife have different ideas about these tasks,
188
their importance, or how they should be accomplished. If the conflict
is perpetual, no amount of problem-solving savvy will fix it.
The tension will deescalate only when you both feel
comfortable living with your ongoing difference. But when the issue
is solvable, the challenge is to find the right strategy for conquering
it. (If you're not sure whether your conflict is solvable or perpetual,
see page 134.)
Here we've listed these six hot spots, the task they each
represent for a marriage, and practical advice for addressing the
solvable disagreements they often trigger.
Stress and more stress
The task: Making your marriage a place of peace.
Most days Stephanie and Todd get home from work within a
few minutes of each other. Too often, instead of a loving reunion,
they find themselves in a shouting match. Todd, who has been
kowtowing to a difficult boss all day, gets annoyed when he can't
find the mail because Stephanie moved it off the table for the nth
time. Stephanie, who has a deadline at work and knows she'll be up
late working, feels her anger surge when she opens the refrigerator
and discovers nothing but Strawberry Snapple.
"There's no food!" she yells. "I can't believe you didn't go to the
supermarket like you promised. What's wrong with you?"
The real question is what's going wrong between Todd and
Stephanie. The answer is that they are bringing their work stress
home, and it is sabotaging their marriage.
Scheduling formal griping sessions can prevent the
spillover of spillover ofeveryday stress into your marriage. everyday stress into your marriage. everyday stress into your marriage.
There's no doubt that work stress has become an increasing
factor in marital dissatisfaction. Today's couples work an average of
one thousand hours more each year than people did thirty years ago.
189
There is less time for talking, relaxing, eating, and even
sleeping. No wonder the days of the cheerful "Honey, I'm home!" are
history for so many families. Most likely "Honey" is working too and
has come home with a stack of papers she needs to prepare for
tomorrow's presentation to a client. Or maybe she's been waiting
tables all day, and the last thing she wants to do is to wait on her
man.
Solution Acknowledge that at the end of a long, stressful day you
may need time to yourselves to decompress before interacting with
each other. If you are feeling suddenly outraged by something your
spouse did, realize that the incident may be overblown in your mind
because you're feeling so tense. Likewise, if your spouse comes home
with a cloud over his head and your "What's wrong?" gets answered
with a snarl, try not to take it personally. He or she probably just had
a bad day. Rather than making the situation worse by lashing out, let
it go.
Build time to unwind into your daily schedule. Make it a ritual,
whether it entails lying on your bed and reading your mail, going for
a jog, or meditating. Of course, some couples find that the easiest way
to relax is to enlist each other's help. If so, try the soothing techniques
described in detail on pages 178179.
Once you're both feeling relatively composed, it's time to come
together and talk about each other's day. Consider this a sanctioned
whining session during which each person gets to complain about
any catastrophes that occurred while the other is understanding and
supportive.
Relations with in-laws

The task: Establishing a sense of "we-ness," or solidarity, between
husband and wife.
Although mother-in-law jokes told by men are a traditional
staple of comedy routines, the real family tension is more frequently
between the wife and her mother-in-law. Invariably the differences
between the two women's opinions, personalities, and life views
become evident the more time they spend together. A decision to go
190
out to dinner can create dissension over such minutiae as where to
eat, when to eat, what to eat, how much to spend, who gets the check,
and so on. Then, of course, there are the deeper issues of values, jobs,
where to live, how to live, how to pray, and whom to vote for.
Although such conflicts usually surface quite early in a
marriage, in-law difficulties can be triggered or revived at many
other times, such as when children are born or pass major milestones
in their development, and again as the parents age and become
increasingly dependent on the couple.
At the core of the tension is a turf battle between the two
women for the husband's love. The wife is watching to see whether
her husband backs her or his mother. She is wondering, "Which
family are you really in?" Often the mother is asking the same
question.The man, for his part, just wishes the two women could get
along better. He loves them both and does not want to have to
choose. The whole idea is ridiculous to him. After all, he has loyalties
to each, and he must honor and respect both. Unfortunately, this
attitude often throws him into the role of peacemaker or mediator,
which invariably makes the situation worse.
Solution The only way out of this dilemma is for the husband to side
with his wife against his mother. Although this may sound harsh,
remember that one of the basic tasks of a marriage is to establish a
sense of "we-ness" between husband and wife. So the husband must
let his mother know that his wife does indeed come first. His house is
his and his wife's house, not his mother's. He is a husband first, then
a son. This is not a pleasant position to take. His mother's feelings
may be hurt. But eventually she will probably adjust to the reality
that her son's family unit, where he is the husband, takes precedence
to him over all others. It is absolutely critical for the marriage that the
husband be firm about this, even if he feels unfairly put upon and
even if his mother cannot accept the new reality.
This is not to suggest that a man do anything that he feels
demeans and dishonors his parents or goes against his basic values.
He should not compromise who he is. But he has to stand with his
wife and not in the middle. He and his wife need to establish their
191
own family rituals, values, and lifestyle and insist that his mother
(and father) respect them.
For this reason, creating or renewing your sense of solidarity
with your spouse may involve some rending and tearing away from
your primary families. That's the challenge David faced when his
parents came for a weekend visit to his new home, a visit that led to
what he now calls the Great Osso Buco Crisis. Here's what happened:
His wife Janie had made Saturday dinner reservations for all of them
at her favorite Italian restaurant. She was very excited about showing
the restaurant off to her Italian in-laws, especially because she often
felt upstaged by her mother-in-law, who was very knowledgeable
about cuisine. But while she and David were out running errands, the
older woman went to the butcher and the supermarket and prepared
David's favorite dish for dinner--osso buco.
When David and Janie arrived home, the savory aroma of
garlic and veal wafted through the air. Janie was furious--but not
surprised—when David's mother said she "forgot" about the
reservations. David was face to face with a dilemma. The veal looked
delicious, and he knew how hurt his mother would be if he didn't eat
it. He really wanted to tell Janie to cancel the reservations.
Although this hardly sounds like a major crisis, it led to a
turning point in David and Janie's marriage. Janie had dreaded her
in-laws' visit to begin with because she felt her mother-in-law always
acted as if Janie was sweet but incompetent while she was the great
savior who would set their household right. Janie was always polite
but distant with David's mom. Privately she would give David an
earful about what a control freak his mother was. David always
insisted Janie was imagining or exaggerating slights. This just made
her angrier.
Now Janie held her breath as she watched David survey the
feast his mother had prepared. He cleared his throat, put his arm
around his mother, and thanked her for cooking such a wonderful
meal. Then he insisted it would keep for another day in the
refrigerator. He explained that it was important to him and Janie to
share with her and his dad how they liked to spend Saturday night
together as a couple at their favorite restaurant.
192
His mother looked highly offended. She got teary-eyed and
made a bit of a scene. (David let his father deal with that.) But it was
worth it to David to see Janie look so happy and triumphant. In the
end, David's message was loud and clear: She comes first, Mom. Get
used to it. "That's when our real marriage began," Janie recalls.
"When he let his mother know that I was now first in his heart."
An important part of putting your spouse first and building
this sense of solidarity is not to tolerate any contempt toward your
spouse from your parents. Noel and Evelyn's marriage was heading
for disaster until Noel learned that lesson. After their son was born, it
was very important to Noel that his parents view him as a good
father. Although he was a very busy lawyer and didn't get to spend
much time with the baby, every other weekend he would bring the
baby with him for a visit with his parents, who lived in the next
town. This gave Evelyn some desperately needed time to herself.
 Often Evelyn would join them at the end of the day. From the
moment she entered the house, she felt like an outsider, as if she had
been cut out of the baby's life. Noel's parents pretty much ignored
her. They'd make a big fuss over the baby and go on and on about
what a great father Noel was. At times they were even sarcastic
toward Evelyn--issuing snide comments, for example, about the fact
that she was still nursing the baby at six months. Since Evelyn knew
that Noel wanted her to wean the baby, she suspected that Noel was
complaining to his parents about her behind her back. In our
laboratory we helped the couple talk about this issue, and it turned
out she was completely right. In an effort to impress his parents, Noel
was sacrificing his "we-ness" with Evelyn by badmouthing her.
Once Noel realized that his need for his parents' approval was
playing out against Evelyn and their marriage, he was able to change.
He began to spend less time at his parents' house with the baby, so
that his parents saw their grandson mostly when they were on
Evelyn's home turf. When his mother expressed concern that the
baby wasn't getting enough to eat, Noel piped up that Evelyn had
just taken him to the pediatrician, who declared him perfectly plump
and healthy. When his father suggested that the baby needed a
heavier snowsuit, Noel told him that Evelyn was the mother and
knew better than anyone else what was best for their son. At first
193
Noel's parents were miffed by his new attitude. But as time went on,
they came to accept the change. And Noel and Evelyn found that
their marriage flourished. They finally developed a sense that they
were a team. They had mastered the task of building "we-ness."
Exercise 1: In-law Problems
If you are having ongoing in-law problems in your marriage, filling
out this brief questionnaire can help. It will let you focus on your
relationships with each other's kin so that you can determine whether
your sense of "we-ness" as a couple needs to be strengthened when it
comes to a particular relative.
You should both jot down your answers to this form on separate paper.
1. Think of your relationship with various members of your spouse's
family. If you feel that your spouse isn't necessarily on your side in
any of these relationships or that there are ongoing issues with a
particular family member, check off the appropriate box.
o Spouse's mother
o Spouse's stepmother
o Spouse's father
o Spouse's stepfather
o Spouse's brother(s)
o Spouse's sisters
o Other family member
Describe the successes so far:
Describe the conflicts that remain:
2. Think about your spouse's relationship with your kin. If you feel
that your spouse isn't necessarily on your side in any of these
194
relationships or that there are ongoing issues with a particular family
member, check off the appropriate box.
o Mother
o Stepmother
o Father
o Stepfather
o Brother(s)
o Sister(s)
o Other family member
Describe the successes so far:
Describe the conflicts that remain:
Now get together with your spouse and read over each other's
responses. Discuss what can be done to increase the amount of
support and solidarity you are getting from each other. Try not to be
defensive if your spouse perceives a problem and you don't.
Remember that much about relationships has to do with perception.
So, for example, if your wife believes that you side with your own
mother against her, that's something you need to work on in your
marriage, even if you don't agree with her perception of the situation.
Money, money, money

The task: Balancing the freedom and empowerment money
represents with the security and trust it also symbolizes.
Whether their bank account is teeming or they're just scrimping
by, many couples confront significant money conflicts. Often such
disputes are evidence of a perpetual issue, since money is symbolic of
many emotional needs--such as for security and power--and goes to
the core of our individual value system. But when a simpler, solvable
financial problem arises, the key to resolving it is to first understand
a marriage's task in this area. While money buys pleasure, it also
195
buys security Balancing these two economic realities can be work for
any couple, since our feelings about money and value are so personal
and often idiosyncratic.
I find that solvable financial differences are usually the
province of newlyweds rather than longer-term couples. That's
because as a marriage goes on, these issues either become resolved
successfully or develop into perpetual problems about money's
symbolic meanings. However, long-term couples may also find
themselves facing a solvable money issue as their circumstances
change. Differences of opinion over job changes, financing the
children's education, planning for retirement, and caring for elderly
parents are common sources of friction in mid life.
Solution Some clearheaded budgeting is called for. Below are some
simple steps you can take to get a handle on how much you'd like to
be spending--and on what. Keep in mind, though, that managing
complex financial matters is beyond the scope of this book. If you
need extra help with financial planning and investing, you'll find
plenty of resources at your local library or bookstore. In particular I
recommend Get a Financial Life by Beth Kobliner (Fireside Books,
1996) and Your Money or Your Life by Joe Dominguez and Vicki
Robin (Penguin, 1992). What's most important in terms of your
marriage is that you work as a team on financial issues and that you
express your concerns, needs, and fantasies to each other before
coming up with a plan. Make sure you don't end up with a budget
that forces either of you to become a martyr. This will only build up
resentment. You'll each need to be firm about items that you consider
nonnegotiable.
Step 1: Itemize Your Current Expenditures
Use a form like the one that follows to record how you have spent
your money over the last month, six months, or year, whichever is
most appropriate to your situation.You may be able to do this just by
reviewing your checkbook and credit card statements.
196
Expenditures
Food
Mortgage or rent
Vacation rentals
Remodeling
Property taxes
Condo maintenance fees
Home office supplies
Utilities
Electricity
Gas
Heat
Water
Phone
E-mail, Internet
Household maintenance
Housecleaning
Laundry
Dry cleaning
Supplies and equipment (vacuum, bathroom cleaner, etc.)
Clothes
Personal care (Haircuts, manicures, sundries)
Car
Gas
Maintenance and repairs
License renewal
Insurance
Parking, tolls
Payments
Other Transportation
Bus, train, ferry fares
Trips
Business
Visiting family
Other vacations
197
Recreation
Eating out or takeout
Baby-sitters
Dates (movies, plays, concerts, sports)
Home entertainment (video rentals, CDs)
Health
Insurance premiums
Doctor
Pharmacy
Health club membership
Other (eyeglasses, massages, counseling, etc.)
Appliances and electronics (tv computer, answering machine)
Gifts
Charitable contributions
Interest on loans, bank charges, credit cards
Life insurance
Investments and savings (stocks, etc.)
Step 2: Manage Everyday Finances
1. Write down every expense from the list above that you consider
essential for your sense of happiness and well-being.
2. Look carefully at your income and assets. Now try to create a
budget that allows you to manage everyday finances and other
"essentials" based on your means.
3. Come up with a plan for paying bills on a regular basis. Determine
who writes the checks and when, and who balances the checkbook.
4. Discuss your separate lists and plans with each other. Look for
common ground between your two approaches. Decide on a
workable strategy that allows both of you to meet your "essential"
needs.
Agree to sit down and revisit your plan in a few months to make sure
it's working for both of you.
Step 3: Plan Your Financial Future
1. Imagine your life 5, 10, 20, or 30 years from now. What would be
your ideal circumstance? Think of things you want (house, and so on)
198
and the kind of life you would ideally like to lead. Also think through
the kinds of financial disasters you would most want to avoid. For
example, some people's greatest financial fear is not having enough
money to retire. Others fear not being able to fund a child's college
education.
2. Now list your long-term financial goals, taking into account what
you most desire and what you most fear. For example, your goals
might include buying your own home or weekend home, as well as
having a well-funded retirement account.
3. Share your lists with each other. Look for similarities in your longterm goals. Discuss your perspectives.
4. Come up with a long-range financial plan that will help you both
meet your goals. Be sure to revisit this plan every so often—say every
year--to make sure you're still in agreement.
Following these steps has helped couples with a wide variety of
financial differences come up with workable solutions. For example,
Linda loved stylish clothes and working out at the health club near
her office. Devon considered both of those frivolous wastes of money.
He far preferred to spend his money on lunches out with friends and
two skiing vacations every year. To Linda, his pleasures were overly
indulgent. After they each filled out the form, they could see exactly
how much money they had. They talked about their finances as a
couple and arrived at a temporary compromise budget. Neither of
them wanted to give up on their favorite pleasures, so they decided
that they would open three savings accounts, one for each of them
plus a joint account. They agreed to put a portion of each paycheck
into their joint account to save for their children's education and
other major expenses down the road. Then they individually would
save for gym memberships and ski trips. They decided that in six
months they would talk over this arrangement again to determine
whether their new budgeting system was working for both of them.
Tina and Gene had a different dilemma. Their oldest son Brian
was just two years away from college. Although they had saved
enough for him to attend the local community college, Tina wanted
to send him to the more rigorous (and more expensive) state
university, which offered far more science courses. Brian had always
been an exceptional student. His dream of becoming an aerospace
199
engineer seemed like a realistic goal. But to pay the higher tuition this
would entail, Gene would have to postpone his dream of buying a
cabin in the mountains. Although Gene cared deeply about his son's
education, he also worried that if they didn't buy a home now, they'd
get priced out of the market and would never realize his lifelong
dream. Gene wanted Tina to go back to work full time so they could
afford the college tuition and the country home. But Tina was
resisting because her very elderly mother lived with them and
depended on Tina for her daily care. Gene and Tina were at this point
having almost daily fights over the issue. Gene thought it was time
for Tina's sister to take over her mother's care. But Tina's sister
worked full time and said she wasn't able to do that. The other option
was to put her mother in a nursing home, but Tina was dead set
against such a decision.
When Tina and Gene filled out the budgeting form, a simple
solution did not present itself. But the process of looking through
their expenditures together transformed the emotional climate
between them dramatically Rather than arguing about the issues,
they felt like a team again. They made lists of the various pieces of
information they needed to find out about student loans and
scholarships.In the end, Gene accepted that he would have to
postpone his dream for a few more years. Tina did go back to work,
but only on a part time basis. Gene was able to shift his work hours
so that he could be home with his mother-in-law while Tina was
away and Brian was able to take out enough student loans to allow
him to go to the state university.
The problems and solutions encountered by these couples are
unlikely to match yours. The point is that whatever your
disagreement over finances, you'll defuse the tension by working as a
team to devise a plan you both can accept, even if it doesn't give you
everything you want right now.
200
Sex
The task: Fundamental appreciation and acceptance of each other.
No other area of a couple's life offers more potential for
embarrassment, hurt, and rejection than sex. No wonder couples find
it such a challenge to communicate about the topic clearly. Often they
"vague out," making it difficult to decipher what they're actually
trying to tell each other. Here's a classic example from a couple we
taped in our lab:
she: Think about your feelings two and a half and three years ago,
and how we dealt with the problem and how we felt. I mean,
think. It was much more a problem then in my eyes than it is
now.
He: I think we're more secure together now than we were then. I
don't know. I would say the actual problem we haven't dealt
with anymore, any differently since then, I don't believe. I don't
know if we've really changed.
She: Do you feel any differently about it, though?
He: How do you feel?
She: Well, I guess I feel that the problem two and a half and three
years ago, I viewed it as something that could ruin our
marriage. I was real worried about us not making it. I don't
really worry about that anymore.
He: I never considered it a threat to our marriage. I know you did,
but I never did.
She: Okay And maybe I'm feeling more secure now, is why I don't.
The "problem" this couple is discussing is that he has always
wanted sex more frequently than she does. In this snippet of
conversation she is trying to get him to agree that it's not a problem
anymore. She wants his reassurance. He thinks the problem still
exists, but he avoids telling her that directly.
 So often when a husband and wife talk to each other about
their sexual needs, their conversations are like this--indirect,
imprecise, inconclusive. Frequently both partners are in a hurry to
201
end the conversation, hopeful that they will miraculously understand
each other's desires without much talk. They rarely say things like "I
love it when you stroke my breasts for a long time the way you did
last night," or "I really need you every day," or "Mornings are my
favorite times for making love," and so on. The problem is that the
less clear you are about what you do and don't want, the less likely
you are to get it. Sex can be such a fun way to share with each other
and deepen your sense of intimacy. But when communication is
fraught with tension, then frustration and hurt feelings too often
result.
Solution Learn to talk to each other about sex in a way that lets you
both feel safe. That means learning the right way to ask for what you
want, and the appropriate way to react to your spouse's requests.
Because most people feel so vulnerable about whether they are
attractive to their spouse and a "good" lover, the key to talking about
sex is to be gentle. A lovemaking session that starts with one partner
criticizing the other is going to end faster than a "quickie." The goal of
sex is to be closer, to have more fun, to feel satisfied, and to feel
valued and accepted in this very tender area of your marriage.
Nothing is guaranteed to make your spouse want to touch you less
than if you say, "You never touch me." It's better to say, "I loved when
we kissed last weekend on the big couch. I'd love more of that, it
makes me feel so good." Likewise, instead of "Don't touch me there,"
you'll get a better response if you say, "It feels extra good when you
touch me here." When you talk to your partner about sex, your
attitude should always be that you are making a very good thing
even better. Even if you aren't satisfied with your current sex life, you
need to accentuate the positive.
If you are on the receiving end of your partner's request, try
very hard not to see it as an implied criticism of your attractiveness,
sexual virility, lovemaking skill, or innermost being. Try to have the
same attitude as a professional cook. A chef isn't insulted if a
customer isn't in the mood for polenta tonight or has an aversion to
squid. Instead he or she makes accommodations that will satisfy the
customer's palate.
202
This doesn’t mean that you have to agree to all of your
partner's requests. It is up to both of you to decide what you feel
okay and safe doing and what you don't. Sexuality is incredibly
malleable, so it is really possible to make accommodations to each
other's desires that will be pleasurable to both of you. For example,
Mike wanted to have sex several times a week, but Lynne thought
once or twice was enough. As a result, Mike felt frustrated and
rejected. Over time he became more insistent that they increase the
frequency. He'd bring home books and all sorts of erotica in an effort
to turn Lynne on. But this just made Lynne feel pressured, which
backfired. As Mike's frustration grew, Lynne's desire dwindled.
By the time they came to our workshop, Lynne and Mike had
no idea how they could work out this issue. We suggested that the
person with the least interest (currently Lynne) needs to feel in
control. We shifted the focus from sex to sensuality. Lynne loved
massages, so we suggested she go to the bookstore and select a book
on massage that appealed to her. We suggested that she be in charge
of the couple's sensual experience. She directed their evenings. While
there was no sex per se, there was a lot of holding and touching.
Gradually, Lynne's sexual desire heightened, and they began to have
sex more frequently--about once a week.
Often expectations get in the way of an optimum love life. Not
all sex has to be of the same quality or intensity. Sometimes it will
feel like you've touched each other to the core of your souls. Other
times it will just be pleasant. Sometimes sex is slow, sometimes it's
brief. Variety can and ought to exist in a sexual relationship. But there
do have to be times when sex is an expression of love. Obviously, the
more often this occurs, the better.
The best way to enrich your love life is to learn about each
other's likes and take the time to remember and memorize these
things, and to use this knowledge in the way your fingers and lips
touch each other. Make sure that this knowledge is really available to
you when you are turned on sexually, and make this knowledge live
in your body and in your sensitivity to your partner's bodily
reactions. This will mean tuning into nonverbal behaviors of your
partner as you are beginning to make love. But try to develop the
203
idea that words are also acceptable as ways of communicating even
during lovemaking.
A major characteristic of couples who have a happy A major characteristic of couples who have a happy
sex life is that sex life is thatthey see lovemaking as an expression they see lovemaking as an expression they see lovemaking as an expression
of intimacy but they don't take of intimacy but they don't takeany differences in any differences in any differences in
their needs or desires personally. their needs or desires personally.
Your sexual life will be further enhanced if you feel safe enough
to share your sexual fantasies with each other and even act them out
together. This is a very delicate area. Although fantasies are the home
of imagination, variety, and adventure in a marriage, very few
couples are able to share their fantasies and then find some way of
honoring them within their sex life. If you are able to share your
fantasies, the result will be great intimacy, romance, and excitement.
Try to cultivate the idea that within the boundaries of your
marriage, all wishes, images, fantasies, and desires are acceptable.
Nothing is intrinsically bad or disgusting. You can say no to your
partner's request, but don't disparage it. Expressing a fantasy
requires a great deal of trust, so take care to be tender when you hear
of a fantasy your partner has. If it's not one of your own, but it's not a
turn-off, then agree to it. Don't take it personally if your spouse
wants you to pretend to be a stranger, a nurse, or a pirate. Just
consider it play The idea, the desire, the fantasy is usually not
understood at all by the person expressing it. No one knows why
particular fantasies are erotic to certain people, they just are.
There are some open manhole covers in the area of sex that you
should know about. The greatest of these is a lack of basic knowledge
about sex. It leads people to base their expectations for their own
performance from informal and unreliable sources, mostly those
heard from friends during adolescence. The result is often that we
judge ourselves quite harshly and feel that we are not very good in
bed. For example, many men think that they have to always be able
to get an erection whenever the situation calls for it. If it doesn't
happen, it is common for great self-doubt to set in. These and many
204
other expectations are things we carry around with us without being
very aware of them.
Another problem with the lack of basic knowledge is that we
presume we know about one another's anatomy and sexual
physiology when we have never learned about these things
anywhere. We wouldn't think to run a new, complex, modern
appliance without at least glancing at the manual. But in the area of
sexuality, we do. Fortunately in this day and age manuals and books
about sexuality are readily available in bookstores. Just don't assume
that you already know about sex without reading about it. Purchase
whatever appeals to you. I highly recommend the classic The Joy of
Sex, edited by Alex Comfort (Pocket Books, 1972), Lonnie Bar bach's
For Each Other (New American Library, 1984), and Bernie
Zilbergeld's The New Male Sexuality (Bantam, 1992).
Housework
The task: Creating a sense of fairness and teamwork.
Joanne was fed up. For months she had been asking Greg not to
throw his dirty laundry on the bedroom floor. For months he kept
forgetting, just like he kept forgetting to vacuum the carpet and wash
the dishes every night, even though he agreed that these were his
jobs. Both of them worked full time, but Joanne usually got home first
and would end up picking up after Greg. As she ran the vacuum or
rinsed the dirty dishes that were still in the sink, she would be
seething. When he got home, she'd give him the silent treatment or
make sarcastic remarks about being the maid. He'd insist that the
problem was that she was a terrible nag."Maybe if you'd leave me
alone about it, I'd be more likely to do it," he'd tell her.
Greg didn't realize how damaging his attitude toward
housework was to his marriage until the day he arrived home to the
sound of banging from the bedroom. He walked in to find his wife,
still in her business suit, nailing his dirty boxer shorts to the oak floor.
205
"They've been there for three days," she told him. "So I figured you
wanted to make them a permanent part of the decor."
Joanne and Greg eventually divorced, so I'm not suggesting
that the solution to housekeeping conflicts can be found at the nearest
hardware store. The point is that men often don't realize how deeply
women care about keeping their home in order. There are certainly
exceptions to the gender differences in this area, but as a general rule,
in the Odd Couple spectrum of cleanliness, women skew more
toward the fastidious Felix and men toward slovenly Oscar.
When a husband doesn't do his agreed-upon share of the
housework, the wife usually feels disrespected and unsupported.
Inevitably this leads to resentment and a less satisfying marriage.
Many husbands just don't understand why housework is such a big
deal to their wives. They may not be slackers on purpose. But many
were raised in traditional homes where their father did no
housework at all. A husband may pay lip service to the notion that
times have changed and that it isn't fair for his wife to work a second
shift when she gets home while he pops open a beer. But old ways
die hard. On some level many men still consider housework to be a
woman's job. When the husband helps, he feels he should be
applauded--but instead his wife keeps demanding he do more, which
makes him defensive and likely to do less.
A major cause of this unfortunate dynamic is that Greg, like
most men, tends to overestimate the amount of housework he does.
This has been documented by British sociologist Arm Oakley. I know
this is true in my own home. When I complain that I'm doing all of
the housework, my wife says, "Good!" because she knows that means
I'm actually doing half.
Solution By now the key to resolving this issue should be clear: Men
have to do more housework! Sometimes men shirk their
responsibility in this department due to a sheer lack of motivation.
Let's face it--no one wants to trudge out the recycling bags in the
snow. So maybe this little fact will spark a husband's enthusiasm for
domestic chores: Women find a man's willingness to do housework
extremely erotic. When the husband does his share to maintain the
home, both he and his wife report a more satisfying sex life than in
206
marriages where the wife believes her husband is not doing his share.
The benefits to these marriages extend beyond the bedroom. In these
relationships the women also have significantly lower heart rates
during marital arguments, which means they are less likely to begin a
discussion harshly and so avoid triggering that whole downward
spiral of conflict involving the four horsemen and flooding that leads
to divorce.
I'm not suggesting that every husband must do a straight 50
percent of the housework if he wants to save his marriage and see his
sex life improve. The key is not the actual amount he does but his
wife's subjective view of whether it's enough. For one couple this
could indeed mean an even split of chores. But in another marriage
the wife may be just as satisfied if he takes care of some chores she
hates--like cleaning the bathroom or vacuuming--or even if he agrees
to budget for a weekly housekeeper to lighten both their loads.
The best way to figure out how much housework a husband
needs to do is for the couple to talk over the following list. By
itemizing exactly who does what, you'll finally have an objective
basis for determining who should do what.
Use the list to describe to each other first your perception of
how things are currently handled and then how you would like them
to be. This list extends beyond actual cleaning to other domestic
chores—like family finances and various aspects of child care--that
can also be causes of conflict if the distribution of labor is seen as
unfair.
You may find that certain patterns emerge. As I said, men often
believe that they are doing a larger share of domestic chores than is
actually the case. In many marriages the husband does more of the
"brute strength" tasks like washing the car or mowing the lawn, or
the abstract jobs like financial planning that don't have to be done on
a daily basis or on a strict timetable. The wife carries more than her
share of the mindless, daily drudge work--like cleaning and picking
up--which leaves her resentful.
207
Who Does What List
Running errands Now: Ideal:
Taking clothes to the cleaners Now: Ideal:
Washing windows Now: Ideal:
Planning the food menu Now: Ideal
Going grocery shopping Now: Ideal:
Cooking dinner Now: Ideal:
Setting the table Now: Ideal:
Cleanup after dinner Now: Ideal:
Cleaning the kitchen Now: Ideal:
Cleaning the bathrooms Now: Ideal:
Putting out clean towels Now: Ideal:
Keeping counters clean Now: Ideal:
General tidying up Now: Ideal:
Getting the car serviced Now: Ideal:
Putting gas in the car Now: Ideal:
Sorting incoming mail Now: Ideal:
Paying the bills Now: Ideal:
Balancing the checkbook Now: Ideal:
Writing letters Now: Ideal:
Taking phone messages Now: Ideal:
Returning phone calls or email Now Ideal:
Saving money Now: Ideal:
Taking out garbage and trash Now: Ideal:
208
Recycling Now: Ideal:
Doing the laundry Now: Ideal:
Folding the laundry Now: Ideal:
Ironing Now: Ideal:
Putting the clean clothes away Now: Ideal:
Sweeping kitchen and eating areas Now: Ideal:
Vacuuming Now: Ideal:
Washing and waxing floors Now: Ideal:
Changing light bulbs Now: Ideal:
Repair of appliances Now: Ideal:
Making the beds Now: Ideal:
Defrosting and cleaning refrigerator Now: Ideal:
Shopping for clothing Now: Ideal:
Planning travel Now: Ideal:
Home repair Now: Ideal:
Remodeling Now: Ideal:
Home maintenance Now: Ideal:
Buying furniture Now: Ideal:
Redecorating home Now: Ideal:
Buying items for the home Now: Ideal:
Buying new appliances Now: Ideal:
Sewing and mending Now: Ideal:
Straightening kitchen cabinets Now: Ideal:
Yard and garden work Now: Ideal:
209
Lawn, tree, and shrubbery maintenance Now: Ideal:
Errands to the bank Now: Ideal:
House plant care Now: Ideal:
Straightening and rearranging closets Now: Ideal:
Getting house ready for guests Now: Ideal:
Party preparations Now: Ideal:
Buying children gifts Now: Ideal:
Taking children to school Now: Ideal:
Picking children up from school Now: Ideal:
Child care after school Now: Ideal:
Child meals and lunches Now: Ideal:
Pediatrician Now: Ideal:
Child Homework Now: Ideal:
Child baths Now: Ideal:
Child discipline Now: Ideal:
Bedtime with kids Now: Ideal:
Dealing with a sick child Now: Ideal:
Handling child crises Now: Ideal:
Dealing with a child's emotions Now: Ideal:
Teacher conferences Now: Ideal:
Dealing with the schools Now: Ideal:
Special children's events Now: Ideal:
Child birthday and other parties Now: Ideal:
Child's lessons Now: Ideal:
210
Child's play dates Now: Ideal:
Shopping for children's stuff Now: Ideal:
Buying presents Now: Ideal:
Keeping in touch with kin Now: Ideal:
Preparing for holidays Now: Ideal:
Planning vacations Now: Ideal:
Planning getaways Now: Ideal:
Planning romantic dates Now: Ideal:
Planning quiet evenings at home Now: Ideal:
Planning weekends Now: Ideal:
Initiating lovemaking Now: Ideal:
Planning dinner out Now: Ideal:
Family outings, drives, picnics Now: Ideal:
Financial planning Now: Ideal:
Major purchases (cars, etc.) Now: Ideal:
Managing investments Now: Ideal:
Talking about the relationship Now: Ideal:
Get-tog ethers with friends Now: Ideal:
Keeping in touch with friends Now: Ideal:
Doing the taxes Now: Ideal:
Legal matters (e.g." wills) Now: Ideal:
Coordinating family's medical care Now: Ideal:
Drugs and other health areas Now: Ideal:
Exercise and fitness Now: Ideal:
Recreational outings Now: Ideal:
211

Now you should have a clear sense of which tasks you
currently share and which fall into each partner's domain. Depending
on what you consider ideal, it may be time to re divide domestic
tasks so that the load is more equitable. Remember, the quantity of
the husband's housework is not necessarily a determining factor in
the housework = sex equation. But two other variables are. The first
is whether the husband does his chores without his wife having to
ask (nag). A husband who does this earns enormous points in the
emotional bank account. The other factor is whether he is flexible in
his duties in response to her needs. For example, if he sees that she's
especially tired one night, does he volunteer to wash the dishes even
though it's her turn? This conveys that all-important honor and
respect for her. Helping his wife in this way will turn her on more
than any "adults only" video.
Becoming parents
The task: Expanding your sense of "ire-ness" to include your
children.
"A child is a grenade. When you have a baby, you set off an
explosion in your marriage, and when the dust settles, your marriage
is different from what it was. Not better, necessarily; not worse,
necessarily; but different." So wrote Nora Ephron in Heartburn, her
roman a clef about the breakup of her previous marriage. Virtually
every study that has looked at how people make the transition from
couple hood to parenthood confirms her view. A baby sets off seismic
changes in a marriage. Unfortunately, most of the time those changes
are for the worse. In the year after the first baby arrives, 70 percent of
wives experience a precipitous plummet in their marital satisfaction.
(For the husband, the dissatisfaction usually kicks in later, as a
reaction to his wife's unhappiness.) There are wide- ranging reasons
for this deep disgruntlement--lack of sleep, feeling overwhelmed and
unappreciated, the awesome responsibility of caring for such a
212
helpless little creature, juggling mothering with a job, economic
stress, and lack of time to oneself, among other things.
The big mystery is not why 67 percent of new mothers feel so
miserable, but why the other 33 percent just seem to sail through the
transition to motherhood unscathed. (In fact, some of these mothers
say their marriage has never been better.) Thanks to the 130 couples
we've followed from their newlywed stage to as long as eight years
afterward, I now know the secret to keeping a marriage happy and
stable even after the "grenade" explodes. What separates these
blissful mothers from the rest has nothing to do with whether their
baby is colicky or a good sleeper, whether they are nursing or bottlefeeding, working or staying home. Rather, it has everything to do
with whether the husband experiences the transformation to
parenthood along with his wife or gets left behind.
Having a baby almost inevitably causes a metamorphosis in the
new mother. She has never felt a love as deep and selfless as the one
she feels for her child. Almost always a new mother experiences
nothing less than a profound reorientation of meaning in her life. She
discovers she is willing to make enormous sacrifices for her child. She
feels awe and wonder at the intensity of her feelings for this fragile
little being. The experience is so life-altering that if her husband
doesn't go through it with her, it is understandable that distance
would develop between them. While the wife is embracing a new
sense “ofwe-ness" that includes their child, the husband may still be
pining for the old "us." So he can't help but resent how little time she
seems to have for him now, how tired she always is, how often she's
preoccupied with feeding the baby. He resents that they can't ride
their bikes to the beach anymore because the baby is too small to sit
up in a back carrier. He loves his child, but he wants his wife back.
What's a husband to do?
The answer to his dilemma is simple: He can't get his wife back-
-he has to follow her into the new realm she has entered. Only then
can their marriage continue to grow. In marriages where the husband
is able to do this, he doesn't resent his child. He no longer feels like
only a husband, but like a father, too. He feels pride, tenderness, and
protectiveness toward his offspring.
213
How can a couple ensure that the husband is transformed
along with his wife? First, the couple need to ignore some popular
bad advice. Many well-meaning experts recommend that you
consider marriage and family a balancing act, as if your lives are a
seesaw with the baby on one end and your marriage on the other.
Couples are counseled to spend some time away from the baby and
focus on their marriage and outside interests: talk about your
relationship, your job, her job, the weather, anything but the baby at
home. But marriage and family are not diametrically opposed.
Rather, they are of one cloth. Yes, the couple should spend time away
from the baby occasionally. But if they are making this transition well
together, they will find that they can't stop talking about the baby,
nor do they want to. They might not even get through that first meal
without calling home--at least twice. Too often, such couples are
made to feel as if they have done something wrong because they
have made their own relationship seemingly secondary to their new
roles as parents. The result is that they feel all the more stressed and
confused. But in fact, they have done something very right. The
important thing here is that they are in it together. To the extent that
both husband and wife make this philosophical shift, the parent-child
relationship and the marriage thrive.
Here are some more tips to help couples stay connected as they
evolve into parents.
Focus on your marital friendship. Before the baby comes,
make sure that you really know each other and your respective
worlds intimately. The more of a team you are now, the easier the
transition will be. If a husband knows his wife, he will be in better
tune with her as she begins her journey to motherhood.
Don't exclude Dad from baby care. Sometimes, in her
exuberance, a new mother comes off as a know-it-all to her husband.
While she pays lip service to the idea that they should share the
baby's care, she casts herself into a supervisory role, constantly
directing--if not ordering--the new father and even chastising him if
he doesn't do things exactly her way: "Don't hold her like that," "You
214
didn't burp him enough," "The bath water's too cold." In the face of
this barrage, some husbands are more than happy to withdraw, to
cede the role of expert to their wives (after all, their own fathers never
knew anything about babies, either) and accept their own
incompetence. The sad result is that they do less and less and
therefore become less and less accomplished and confident in caring
for their own child. Inevitably, they begin to feel more excluded.
The solution is simple. The new mother needs to back off. She
needs to realize that there's more than one way to burp a baby If she
doesn't like her husband's way, she should remember that the baby is
his child too and will benefit from experiencing more than one
parenting style. A few baths in tepid water are a small price for an
infant--and a marriage--to pay for the father's ongoing commitment
to his family If the mother feels her husband's approach is really
unsafe, she should direct him to their pediatrician, Dr. Spock's tome,
or some other edifying baby-care guide. Some small, well-timed
doses of gentle advice-giving are fine (don't forget to use a softened
startup), but lectures and criticism will backfire.
Feeding time can be especially difficult for the new dad. Penis
envy may well be a Freudian myth, but breast envy is alive and well
in almost every home where the wife is nursing an infant. Fathers
can't help but feel jealous when they see that beautiful bond
developing between their wife and baby. It's as if the two have
formed a charmed circle that he just can't enter. In response to this
need, some baby-care catalogs actually offer devices that allow men a
close approximation of the nursing experience. There is, for example,
an attachment that you can strap onto your chest that delivers warm
milk to the baby through plastic breasts! But most couples don't need
to resort to extra equipment to help the man feel included. Instead,
they can find a role for the husband in the ritual of breast feeding. For
example, it can be the husband's job to carry the baby to the mother
at feeding time. He can also be the official "bur per." He could also
make it his custom to sit quietly with his wife and child during
feeding times, gently stroking the baby's head, for example, or
singing to his baby
215
Let Dad be baby's playmate. Some men have admitted to me
that they don't feel much connection with their baby until the child
gets older and can walk, talk, and play Unfortunately by then their
distance from family life has created fissures in their marriage. The
reason men may take longer to "bond" with their children is that, as
countless studies have confirmed, women tend to be more nurturing
toward children while men are more playful. And since most men
assume you can't really play with a helpless baby, they don't feel
engaged by their child for much of the crucial first year.
But dads who spend time with their young babies will discover
that they are not "blobs" who do nothing but cry, nurse, poop, and
sleep. Even newborns can be great playmates. Babies begin to smile
at a mere three weeks. Even earlier than that they can track
movements with their eyes. Soon they are chortling, kicking their legs
in delight. In short, the father who gets to know his babies by
bathing, diapering, and feeding them will inevitably find that they
love to play with him and that he has a special role in their lives.
Carve out time for the two of you. Part of the transition to
parenthood entails placing a priority (albeit usually second place) on
the marriage itself. So you should use a baby-sitter, a relative, or
friend to get some time alone with each other. But remember, you
haven't failed if you end up spending a lot of your "dates" discussing
the baby--you've succeeded. As the baby grows into a toddler and
then becomes school-aged, you'll find that your conversations when
you're alone together won't always gravitate toward your child and
your role as parents.
Be sensitive to Dad's needs Even if he is a good team player
and is making the philosophical shift toward parenthood along with
his wife, the man is still going to feel somewhat deprived by the
baby's overwhelming and seemingly endless need for her. Even if,
intellectually, he understands that the baby's needs supplant his own
in priority, he's going to miss his wife. The more his wife
acknowledges what he has given up and lets him know how central
he still is to her life, the more understanding and supportive he will
216
be able to be. If she never has any time for just the marriage, he will
have a tendency to withdraw from the relationship.
Give Mom a break. For all the daily wonders a mother
experiences during the newborn stage, she is also likely to be
exhausted. It will help their marriage if her husband will modify his
work hours so he can come home earlier and on the weekends take
over for her now and then so that she can get a needed break to sleep,
see a friend, or a movie, or do whatever else she needs to feel part of
the world again.
Couples who follow this advice will discover that parenthood
doesn't drag down their relationship but elevates it to a new level of
closeness, understanding, and love for each other.
In this chapter I've tried to give you practical advice to help you solve
some common marital problems. But sometimes, no matter how
diligently you try to end a conflict, it just can't be done. If that's the
case, you are dealing with a perpetual problem. Avoiding or
breaking out of gridlock over such a problem is one of the chief
challenges all couples face. My next principle will show you just how
to save--or protect--your marriage from your irreconcilable
differences.
217
10
Principle 6: Principle 6:
Overcome Gridlock Overcome Gridlock
You want to have children, he doesn’t. She wants you to attend
church with her, you’re an atheist. He’s a ho,ebody, you’re ready for
a party every night. If you feel hopelessly gridlocked over a problem
that just can’t be solved, it can be cold comfort to know that other
couples handle similar conflict with aplomb, treating them the way
they would a bad back or allergies. When you’re gridlocked, trying to
view your differences as a kind of psychological trick knee that you
can learn to cope with may seem impossible. But you can do it.
The goal in ending gridlock is not to solve the problem, but
rather to move from gridlock to dialogue. The gridlock conflict will
probably always be a perpetual issue in your marriage, but one day
you will be able to talk about it without hurting each other. You will
learn to live with the problem.
To navigate your way out of gridlock, you have to first understand its cause. Whether the issue is momentous, like which of your
religions to pass on your children, or ridiculous, like which way to
fold dinner napkins, gridlock is sign that you have dreams for your
life that aren’t being addressed or respected by each other. By dreams
218
I mean the hopes, aspirations, and wishes that are part of your
identity and give purpose and meaning to your life.
Dreams can operate at many different levels. Some are very
practical (such as wanting to achieve a certain amount of savings),
but others are profound. Often these deeper dreams remain hidden
while the more mundane dreams piggyback on top of them and are
easier to see. For example, underneath the dream to make lots of
money may be a deep need for security.
What dreams are made of?
Often our deepest dreams are rooted in childhood. You may
long to re-create some of your warmest memories of family life from
your youth--such as having dinner together every night without
interruptions from the TV or telephone. Or, you may feel the
psychological need to distance yourself from painful childhood
memories by not duplicating the same activities. For example, you
may resist having family dinners if the evening meal in your
childhood home was often the scene of hostility between your
parents that left you with indigestion.
Here is a list of some common "deep" dreams expressed by
couples I've worked with.
1. A sense of freedom
2. The experience of peace
3. Unity with nature
4. Exploring who I am
5. Adventure
6. A spiritual journey
7. Justice
8. Honor
9. Unity with my past
10. Healing
11. Knowing my family
12. Becoming all I can be
219
13. Having a sense of power
14. Dealing with growing older
15. Exploring a creative side of myself
16. Becoming more powerful
17. Getting over past hurts
18. Becoming more competent
19. Asking God for forgiveness
20. Exploring an old part of myself I have lost
21. Getting over a personal hang-up
22. Having a sense of order
23. Being able to be productive
24. A place and a time to just "be"
25. Being able to truly relax
26. Reflecting on my life
27. Getting my priorities in order
28. Finishing something important
29. Exploring the physical side of myself
30. Being able to compete and win
31. Travel
32. Quietness
33. Atonement
34. Building something important
35. Ending a chapter of my life--saying good-bye to something
All of these dreams are beautiful. None of them are inherently
bad for a marriage. But they can cause problems if they are hidden or
not respected by your spouse. When this occurs, you may either have
open battles over the issue, or it may go underground and be
expressed symbolically. In the latter case, the couple may think they
are at loggerheads over whether to go out to dinner every Sunday
night, but the bottom-line issue has to do with something much
deeper than a restaurant meal. Sunday night holds a special place in
both of their hearts, stemming from their childhoods. Her dream is to
eat out because her family did that every Sunday, a treat that made
her feel special. But for her husband, a restaurant meal was always
much less of a treat than having his very busy mother cook for the
220
family--something she only did on Sundays. So the question of a
restaurant versus a home meal is really symbolic of what makes each
of them feel loved.
When dreams are respected
Why do some couples cope so gracefully with these sorts of issues
while others get bogged down? The difference is that the happy
couple understands that helping each other realize their dreams is
one of the goals of marriage. "We want to know what the other
person wants in their life," says Justine, referring to herself and her
husband, Michael. But she could just as well be talking for all
emotionally intelligent couples. In happy marriages partners
incorporate each other's goals into their concept of what their
marriage is about. These goals can be as concrete as wanting to live in
a certain kind of house or to get a certain academic degree. But they
can also be intangible, such as wanting to feel safe or wanting to view
life as a grand adventure.
Shelley wants to go to college. Malcolm's hefty paycheck allows
her to do that. But he wants to quit his high-pressure marketing job
because his dream is to be his own boss and build boats. In a happy
marriage neither spouse insists or attempts to manipulate the other
into giving up their dream. They work it out as a team. They fully
take into account each other's wishes and desires.
Maybe Malcolm decides to keep at the grind till Shelley finishes
school. Maybe Shelley studies part time or suspends her studies for
an agreed-upon length of time. Maybe practicality demands that one
or both of their dreams be put on hold for a while. Whatever they
decide to do isn't really the issue. The point is that their concept of
their marriage incorporates supporting both of these dreams. The
way they go about making such decisions--with mutual respect for
an acknowledgment of each other's aspirations--is part of what
makes their marriage meaningful to them.
221
A horse named Daphne
When either spouse doesn't fully appreciate the importance of
supporting his or her partner's dreams, gridlock is almost inevitable.
That was the root cause of the severe marital problems between Ed
and Luanne, a Seattle couple who were interviewed in my Love Lab
for Dateline NEC. When Ed and Luanne were in the lab together, you
could see that their fondness and affection were still there. But they
were experiencing enormous stress over Daphne, Luanne's nine-yearold horse, which she often competed with in horse shows.
Before they were married, Ed was very taken with Daphne. But
now that he was confronted with the monthly bills for her care and
maintenance, she became a source of tension between him and his
wife. He wanted Luanne to sell the horse so that they could save
money. The more he and Luanne argued over selling Daphne the
more he feared, deep down, that she cared for the horse more than
she did for him and their marriage.
The couple talked out this problem in three fifteen-minute
sessions, snippets of which were aired on the show. In between those
sessions my team and I coached them, using the sorts of techniques
you'll find in this chapter. Luanne was told not to give up on her
dream and to make sure that Ed understood that he came first in her
heart. I helped Ed understand that helping Luanne realize her dream
to compete in horse shows with Daphne was part of his role as her
spouse. He also needed to accept Luanne's influence when it came to
making financial decisions. By the end of the three sessions Ed and
Luanne had made a major leap forward in their marriage. When Ed
told her he would support her decision to keep Daphne, her wide
smile lit up the screen.
Today, two and a half years later, Ed and Luanne are happily
married. Luanne has sold Daphne (though she still visits her) in order
to lease a younger horse. She continues to compete in horse shows
and Ed continues to support her right to do so.
222
When dreams are hidden

For Ed and Luanne it was apparent that a dream was the root cause
of their conflict. The challenge was to respect the dream and each
other's needs. But for many couples the dream that is at the core of
the conflict is not so obvious. Only by uncovering this dream can the
couple get out of gridlock.
Take the case of Katherine and Jeff. They were happily married
until Katherine became pregnant. Suddenly, it seemed to Jeff, her
Catholic faith took on a much more central role in her life. He himself
was an agnostic. When he found out that she had been talking with
her father about having the baby baptized, he was livid. He did not
want his child to have any kind of formal religious instruction.
By the time Katherine and Jeff discussed this conflict in my lab,
they had clearly become gridlocked. I could tell that their marriage
was in serious danger because they were emotionally distant from
each other. Even while discussing the highly personal issues of faith
and family, they didn't raise their voices, cry, smile, or touch each
other. They were able to talk intellectually about their difference of
opinion, but they were emotionally disengaged. And since their
problem was really an emotional one--concerning their feelings about
families, parenthood, and religion--no amount of careful intellectual
analysis would be able to resolve it.
At their next session, I suggested that instead of trying to solve
the issue, they should just listen to each other talk about what
religion symbolized to them. This was the only way to get to the
hidden dreams that were fueling the conflict. Katherine went first.
She described how her beliefs had carried her through very hard
times. Her parents went through a rancorous divorce. For ten years
her father had no contact with the family. Her mother became so
depressed that Katherine couldn't depend on her. She felt completely
unloved and alone until she turned to the Church, which embraced
her. Not only did she feel a kinship with her fellow worshipers but
she felt comforted by prayer. When all the chips were down, feeling
223
God's love brought her deep comfort. Katherine started crying as she
remembered those hard times and the solace she found in religion.
Jeff explained that he had been an agnostic his entire life. In
contrast to Katherine's dysfunction al family, his was very strong and
loving. When he went through hard times, he always turned to his
parents. He wanted his child to feel the same trust in him and
Katherine. He feared that if their son was "indoctrinated" into the
Church, this would interfere with that bond; the child would be
trained to turn to God instead of his parents.
Jeff and Katherine had opposing dreams: He envisioned them
as a happy family that would supply all the love and support their
children needed. He saw religion as a threat to their deep connection.
Katherine viewed religion as a vital support system that she wanted
to ensure was there for her children.
Once these dreams were discussed openly, the mood in the
room changed dramatically. Jeff told Katherine that he loved her. It
finally sank in to him that her desire to baptize their baby came out of
her deep love for their child--for his child. He realized it made
"perfect sense" that out of this love she would want to protect the
baby from ever feeling the pain she had experienced. This helped him
reconnect with his own deep feelings for Katherine, which had gotten
buried under all of the bitterness and anger.
In the first session no emotion had passed between the couple.
But this time you could see the compassion on Jeff's face as he
listened to his wife recount her childhood. When she cried, he
handed her tissues and encouraged her to keep talking. Katherine
listened just as intently to his side of the story.
Now that the real issues were out in the open, they were able to
talk about how they could raise their son in a way that honored both
their visions. Jeff told her he wouldn't oppose the baptism. He
himself would always be agnostic, but it was okay with him if the
child received rudimentary training in Catholicism. However, he still
opposed intensive religious study, because he feared the Church
might impose ideas on the child. Katherine was able to accept this
compromise.
224
Deep issues like these are unlikely to be declawed in just one
session. But Jeff and Katherine made an important first step. They
turned toward each other and acknowledged with respect each
other's dreams for their child. They agreed to seek further counseling
to build on the success of the lab session. Will this issue ever go away
or be resolved in their marriage? Probably not. But they have begun
to learn to live with it peacefully.
If you've reached gridlock on any issue in your marriage, big or
small, the first step is to identify which dream or dreams are fueling
the conflict. One good indicator that you're wrestling with a hidden
dream is that you see your spouse as being the sole source of the
marital problem. If you find yourself saying, for example, that the
problem is simply that he is a slob or she is just irresponsible or
overly demanding, that's a sign of a hidden dream. It may indicate
that you don't see your part in creating the conflict because it has
been hidden from view.
Uncovering a hidden dream is a challenge. The dream is
unlikely to emerge until you feel that your marriage is a safe place to
talk about it. That's why it's important to begin by working on my
first three principles, outlined in Chapters 3, 4, and 5, in order to
strengthen your friendship with your mate.
Keep working on your un resolvable conflicts. Keep working on your un resolvable conflicts.
Couples who are demanding of their marriage are Couples who are demanding of their marriage are
more likely to have more likely to havedeeply satisfying unions than deeply satisfying unions than deeply satisfying unions than
those who lower their expectations. those who lower their expectations. heir expectations.
You may find that when you first begin to recognize and
acknowledge your dreams, the problem between you and your
spouse seems to get worse rather than better. Be patient.
Acknowledging and advocating for your dreams in a marriage is not
easy The very nature of gridlock means that your dream and your
spouse's appear to be in opposition, so you've both become deeply
entrenched in your positions and fear accepting each other's
influence and yielding.
Once you're ready to overcome gridlock, here's how to proceed.
225
Step 1: become a dream detective
Often, deeply personal dreams go unspoken or underground after
marriage because we assume they must in order to make the
relationship work. It's common for both partners not to feel entitled
to their complaints. They may see their own desires as "childish" or
"impractical." But such labels don't change the fact that the dream is
something you long for, and if the marriage doesn't honor it, conflict
will almost inevitably ensue. In other words, when you adjust to
marriage by burying a dream, it just resurfaces in disguised form-as a
gridlocked conflict.
Exercise 1: Hidden drearns
This exercise will give you plenty of practice in uncovering
hidden dreams without, at first, focusing on your own marriage.
Below are six examples of common gridlocked conflicts. Read each
one, and think about what dreams may be hidden inside each
partner's perspective. Make up a brief story, or narrative, that
explains the husband's dream and his position then do the same for
the wife. In each case imagine that this is your position and that it is
very hard for you to yield. Think of what your position means to you
and where this dream may come from in your past. Imagining other
people's dreams will help you unlock the door to those causing
gridlock in your own marriage.
This is a creative exercise that has no right or wrong answers.
To get you started, we've included the suggested dreams and stories
for the first two couples. For the rest of the couples, you'll find this
material on page 229. Try not to look at our stories about these
couples'- dreams until you've come up with your own. You'll get far
more out of this exercise if you do it yourself.
Couple 1
Husband: I think my wife is too neat and tidy I find myself constantly
trying to find things after she has cleaned up. I think she is being
inconsiderate and overly controlling, and I'm tired of it.
226
My Dreams Within This Conflict Might Be:
My parents were very strict disciplinarians. They saw any
disagreement with them as insubordination. As a result I became somewhat
of a rebel. I freely admit that I have a problem with authority, and that's why
I decided to build my own business. My dream is to have a home where I can
be myself, and that means not following any rigid set of rules. I want my
kids to challenge authority and think for themselves, not simply learn to be
obedient. I myself want to be free in my home, including being sloppy at
times.
Wife: I like a certain amount of order and neatness in our home. I
find myself constantly cleaning up my husband's messes. I think
he is being inconsiderate, and I am tired of this.
My Dreams Within This Conflict Might Be:
I grew up in a totally chaotic home. There was nothing I could count
on as a child. I never knew who was driving me to school or picking me up.
My mom would sometimes forget to pick me up, and I hated her for that
sometimes. Then I would get home, and there would often be no dinner and
no clean clothes. It fell on my shoulders to create all the order and sense of
responsibility for my younger sibs. I resented having to do all that. My
dream is to provide a much healthier family environment for my kids and
family. To me order means predictability, security, and peacefulness. I want
that for my kids. When the house is a mess, it takes me back to the chaos of
my youth.
Couple 2
Husband: My wife is very emotional and claims that I am far too
unemotional. This difference between us makes me feel that she
is over reactive and out of control at times, perhaps overly
sensitive. I think that being rational is usually the best approach
to strong emotional situations, not getting more emotional. My
wife claims that I am hard to read and too distant.
227
My Dreams Within This Conflict Might Be:
I grew up in a family where everyone was a debater. We loved to
argue with one another. My dad always asked a question, challenged me,
and then took a contrary position to mine. Then the debate was on. It was no
holds barred, and we all loved it. But getting emotional was illegal in this
debating contest. Once someone got emotional, the argument was over. So
staying in emotional control was highly prized in my family. It still is. So
maybe I should be more emotional, but it's not in my makeup. My dream is
to be strong. I think of being emotional as a weakness.
Wife: I am a very emotional person and my husband is far too
unemotional. This difference between us makes me feel that my
partner is cold and "fake" at times, not really present. Many
times I have no idea what he is feeling. I am frustrated by this
difference between us.
My Dreams Within This Conflict Might Be:
I am just an emotional person and that's all there is to it. 1 think
that's what life is all about, feeling things, being in contact, responding.
That's what "responsible" ought to mean, "response- able, " or able to
respond. That's the highest value for me. I respond to everything around me,
to great art, to architecture, to children, to puppies, to competition in
athletics, to sad movies, to everything. To be emotional just means being
alive. This is the way I was raised, and I'm glad. My dream is to share my
emotions with the person I love. If I can't the marriage is doomed to seem
dead, fake, and lonely.
Couple 3
Husband: My wife is overly jealous, especially at parties. I think that
social occasions are a time to meet new people, which I find very
interesting. But my wife gets clingy and shy. She claims that I
Hirt with other women at parties, but this isn't true at all. I find
228
the accusation insulting, and it makes me angry. I don't know
how to reassure my wife, and I'm tired of not being trusted.
My Dreams Within This Conflict Might Be:
Wife: At parties and other places my husband looks at other women
and acts flirtatious. I find this upsetting and demeaning. I have
brought this up repeatedly but cannot get him to stop.
My Dreams Within This Conflict Might Be:
Couple 4
Wife: My husband likes to have sex much more often than I do. I
don't know what to do when he keeps approaching me for
sexual intimacy. I don't know how to say no in a gentle way.
This pattern makes me feel like an ogre. I don't know how to
deal with this.
My Dreams Within This Conflict Might Be:
Husband: I like to have sex much more often than my wife. I keep
getting my feelings hurt when she turns me down. This pattern
makes me feel unattractive and unwanted. I don't know how to
deal with this.
My Dreams Within This Conflict Might Be:
Couple 5
Wife: I think that my husband is far too stingy when it comes to
money and doesn't believe in spending enough on just enjoying
life and having fun. I also resent not having more personal
freedom and control when it comes to money
My Dreams Within This Conflict Might Be:
229
Husband: I think that my wife is impractical when it comes to money
and spends far too thoughtlessly and selfishly

My Dreams Within This Conflict Might Be:
Couple 6
Wife: My husband likes to stay in much closer touch with our
families than I do. To me family connections are great sources of
stress and disappointment. I have broken away from my family,
and I want much greater distance.
My Dreams Within This Conflict Might Be:
Husband: I like to stay in much closer touch with my family than my
wife does. To me family connections are very important. She
wants greater independence from our families than I do.
My Dreams Within This Conflict Might Be:
Sample Dreams
Couple 3
Husband: I really do not flirt, nor do I have any interest in anyone but my
spouse. It's just that parties are my only way of really satisfying my
gregarious and wild side. I really don't want to be responsible or
anyone else when I go to a party. My dream is to feel the freedom to
explore.
Wife: I have always wanted to be able to feel that I was "enough" for
someone special in my life. That is my dream: to feel truly attractive
and desirable to my partner. I want my partner to be interested in me,
in knowing me and finding out what I think, wanting to know what I
am like inside. I would find it incredibly romantic if 1 could go to a
party with my husband and he didn't even notice that there was
230
anyone else there, had eyes only for me, and was totally satisfied
spending hours in rapt conversation and dancing with just me.
Couple 4
Wife: I was sexually mistreated long ago. I had no control over this, and it
was quite horrible, but it did happen. I know my partner is not to blame
for many of the feelings 1 now have. But I feel that sex can be okay only
if it is on my terms. In my marriage there has been a lot of healing and
gentleness, but I probably will never get over these feelings of having
gone through a real trauma. My dream is to have sexual closeness on
my terms only.
Husband: My dream is to have my partner initiate sexual encounters with
me and somehow be "swept away" by passion, I guess to really be
totally attracted to me. I know I am not especially much to look at, but
on some days 1 am not too bad. 1 periodically want my partner to feel
that I am simply irresistible.
Couple 5
Wife: Life is too short to just save for the future all the time. I know that a
certain amount of that is necessary, but I want to have some sense that
I am not living just for tomorrow. I don't want to feel that life is
passing me by. And that's what 1 often feel, that I am not special
enough to "waste" money on. I want to feel special and very alive.
Where this comes from is, I suppose, always having to scrimp when I
was poor. But now I make a good income, and I don't have to live like
that anymore.
Husband: I want to enjoy life, but within limits. To me the problem with
the world is greed. People never seem to be able to have enough "stuff"
or get enough money. Just look at Americans on vacation, with all their
things, campers, motorcycles, boats, cars. I don't want to want things.
I want to be satisfied with just a small amount of things and a small
amount of money. I honestly don't need very much to be happy. So I see
myself as kind of like a monk, who has a purpose in life, and I do have
that. A monk can be satisfied with very little, contented, counting all
231
the blessings in life, and there are so many. So I believe in saving and
spending very little. To me that's how one should lead a moral life.
Where does this come from? I think it comes from my father, who also
was very frugal. Thanks to him our family always did well, and when
he died, my mom was well provided for. I respect what he accomplished.
Couple 6
Wife: It took. me a great deal of effort to get away from a very dysfunction
al family. My parents were very cold and distant. My sister wound up
in a mental hospital, and my brother became a drug addict. I was the
only one who escaped. I escaped by becoming very distant from my
family and becoming very close to my friends. Friendships have always
meant a lot to me and continue to be very important. But I am wary of
being close to my husband's family. I see a lot of dysfunction al
patterns, and they scare me. My dream is for us to form our own family
traditions and maintain our own independence.
Husband: To me a feeling of an extended family has always been very
important. I can recall many a Sunday when my mother would have
twenty or thirty family members visit. The coffee and pastries would
keep coming all afternoon, and there would be lots of good stories, and
card playing, and lots of laughter. Then there would be great food for
dinner. Even during the hard times, my mother was always able to
stretch the soup and it stayed thick and hearty. My dream is to have
this family feeling of community, closeness, and great comfort in my
own family.
Step 2: work on a gridlocked marital issue

Now that you have had some practice uncovering dreams, try it
with your own marriage. Choose a particular gridlocked conflict to
work on. Then write an explanation of your position. Don't criticize
or blame your spouse. Use the statements made by the couples above
232
as your guide--notice that they don't bad-mouth each other.Instead,
they focus on what each partner needs, wants, and is feeling about
the situation. Next, write the story of the hidden dreams that underlie
your position. Explain where these dreams come from and why they
are so meaningful to you.
Once you both understand which dreams are fueling the
gridlock, it's time to talk about them. Each person gets fifteen
minutes as the speaker and fifteen minutes as the listener. Do not try
to solve this problem. Attempting to do that now is likely to backfire.
Your goal is simply to understand why each of you feels so strongly
about this issue.
Speaker's job: Talk honestly about your position and what it means
to you. Describe the dream that's fueling it. Explain where the dream
comes from and what it symbolizes. Be clear and honest about what
you want and why it is so important. Talk as if you were explaining
your dream to a good friend or neutral third party. Don't try to
censor or downplay your feelings about your dream in order to avoid
hurting or arguing with your spouse. If you find this difficult, review
the advice in Chapter 8 about softening the startup.Some of the same
approaches hold: namely, to make "I" statements and to talk only
about your feelings and your needs. This is not the time to criticize or
argue with your partner. How you feel about your spouse in
relationship to this dream is a satellite issue that should not be
addressed right now.
Listener's job: Suspend judgment. Listen the way a friend would
listen. Don't take your spouse's dream personally even though it
clashes with one of yours. Don't spend your time thinking up
rebuttals or ways to solve the problem. Your role now is just to hear
the dream and to encourage your spouse to explore it. Here are some
supportive questions to ask. You don't have to use these verbatim--
put the thought and spirit behind them into your own words.
233
• "Tell me the story of that. I'd like to understand what it
means to you."
• "What do you believe about this issue?"
• "What do you feel about it?"
• "What do you want? What do you need?"
• "What do these things mean to you?"
Don’t:
Georgia: I've always dreamed of going on a mountain-climbing
expedition to Mount Everest.
Nathan: First of all, we can't possibly afford something like that.
Besides, I can't think of anything more stressful than mountain
climbing. I get vertigo standing on a table.
Georgia: Forget it.
Do:
Georgia: I've always dreamed of going on a mountain-climbing
expedition to Mount Everest.
Nathan: Tell me more about what it means to you to climb a
mountain. What would it do for you?
Georgia: I think I would feel exhilarated, like I was at the top of the
world. As a child I was always told that I was weak and couldn't
do anything. My parents were always saying "careful, careful," I
think climbing a mountain would be the most liberating thing I
could do. I'd feel such a sense of accomplishment.
If you can, tell your partner that you support his or her dream.
That doesn't necessarily mean that you believe the dream can or
should be realized. There are three different levels of honoring your
partner's dreams--all of which are beneficial to your marriage. The
first is to express understanding of the dream and be interested in
learning more about it even though you don't share it. For example,
234
Nathan could support Georgia's decision to take a course in
mountain climbing and listen with enthusiasm when she talks about
it. The second level would be to offer financial support for her dream.
This would mean helping Georgia finance a mountain- climbing trip.
The third level would be to become a part of the dream, to come to
enjoy mountain climbing himself.
Acknowledging and respecting each other's Acknowledging and respecting each other's
deepest, most personal hopes deepest, most personal hopesand dreams is the and dreams is the and dreams is the
key to saving and enriching your marriage. key to saving and enriching your marriage.
You may find that you're able to "go all the way" with some of
your partner's dreams while with others you can't get past the first
level of understanding and interest. That's okay. The bottom line in
getting past gridlock is not necessarily to become a part of each
other's dreams (although your marriage will be more enriched to the
extent that you can) but to honor these dreams. After all, you don't
want the kind of marriage in which you triumph at the expense of
crushing your partner.
Step 3: soothe each other
Discussing dreams that are in opposition can be stressful. Since
you'll accomplish nothing if either of you becomes flooded, take a
break for some soothing before you attempt to slog through the
gridlock. See the exercises in Chapter 8 ("Soothe Yourself and Each
other," )
Step 4: end the gridlock
Now it's time to begin the ongoing task of making peace with
this issue, accepting the differences between you, and establishing
some kind of initial compromise that will help you continue to
discuss the problem amicably. Understand that your purpose is not
to solve the conflict--it will probably never go away completely
235
instead, the goal is to "declaw" the issue, to try to remove the hurt so
the problem stops being a source of great pain.
The way you start this process is by using the circle exercise
("Finding Common Ground") on page 182. You define the minimal
core areas that you cannot yield on. To do this you need to look deep
into your heart and try to separate the issue into two categories. In
one put those aspects of the issue that you absolutely cannot give on
without violating your basic needs or core values. In the second
category put all aspects of the issue where you can be flexible,
because they are not so "hot" for you. Try to make the second
category as large as possible, and the first category as small as
possible.
Share your two lists with your spouse. Working together, and
using the skills you learned in Chapter 8, come up with a temporary
compromise. Try it for about two months and then review where you
stand. Don't expect this to solve the problem, only to help you both
live with it more peacefully For example, Sally believes in living for
the moment--she tends to be spontaneous and loose with her money.
Gus's main goal in life is to feel secure. He moves slowly and
carefully toward decisions and is very frugal. These differences lead
them to clash when Sally insists that they buy a mountain cabin. Gus
immediately says no-they can't afford it. Sally feels confident that
they can.
For a year they gridlock over this issue. Whenever they try to
discuss it, they become embroiled in a shouting match. Gus lets Sally
know he considers her an irresponsible dreamer who always wants
to squander the money he works so hard to earn. Sally accuses Gus of
wanting to squash all the fun and joy out of her life.
To overcome the gridlock, Gus and Sally first have to explore
the symbolic meaning of their positions on the cabin. In their first
conversation to try to work on this issue, Sally says that her dreams
are to pursue pleasure, to be able to truly relax, and to feel unity with
nature, all of which she can realize by having a cabin. Although she
also fears that Gus wants to turn her into a drone who's living just for
tomorrow, she doesn't say this to him now. (She's said it frequently in
the past.) Instead, she focuses on what she desires, not her anger and
fears connected to Gus.
236
When it's Gus's turn to talk, he tells her that saving money has
a lot of symbolic meaning for him. He longs to feel financially secure
because he fears being destitute in his old age. He remembers seeing
his grandparents suffering because they were so poor. His
grandfather ended up in a state-run nursing home that Gus believes
took away his dignity One of his big goals in life is not to feel
humiliated when he is old. Gus is also furious at Sally because he
believes she is reckless and has a childish need for immediate
gratification, which is a threat to his well-being and the life he's
trying to build for both of them. However, he doesn't hurl those
accusations at her this time. Instead, he sticks to explaining and
describing his dream of financial security and its roots in his
childhood.
Once Sally and Gus have discussed the symbolic meaning of
their positions, a transformation takes place. Rather than seeing each
other's dreams as threats, they see them for what they are: deep
desires held by someone they love. Although their dreams are still in
opposition, they are now motivated to find some common ground, to
find a way to respect and perhaps even accommodate both of them.
Here's how they do this:
1. They define the minimal core areas that they cannot yield on. Sally
says she must have a cabin. Gus says he must save $30,000 in order to
feel financially secure.
2. They define their areas of flexibility. Sally says she can settle for
a small cabin on just a couple of acres, rather than the larger retreat
she had envisioned. She can also be flexible on the timing of
acquiring a cabin. She would like to buy one right now, but can wait
a few years as long as she feels Gus supports the decision and they
work toward it together. Gus says he can be flexible about how
quickly he must save his $30,000 as long as he knows that they are
consistently working toward that goal by saving a specific amount
from each of their paychecks.
3. They devise a temporary compromise that honors both of their
dreams. They will buy a small cabin, but not for another three years.
Meanwhile, they will devote half of their savings to a down payment
and half to a mutual fund. In a couple of months they will review this
plan and decide if it's working.
237
 Sally and Gus realize that their underlying perpetual problem
will never go away. Sally is always going to be the visionary, having
ideas for things like cabins and great trips, and Gus is going to worry
about their financial security, their retirement fund, and so on. But by
learning how to cope with their differences, they can avoid gridlock
on any specific conflicts their fundamental differences trigger.
Here are a few other examples, using some of the couples from
the "Detecting Dreams" exercise above, that show how you can learn
to live with your differences through this process. While none of
these conflicts are likely to mirror yours exactly, they should give you
an idea of how couples with entrenched differences of opinion can
overcome gridlock.
Couple 1
Gridlocked problem: Housecleaning--she wants him to be neater, he
wants her to leave him alone about it.
The dreams within the conflict:
Hers: A sense of order and security athome
His: A sense of freedom in his own home
Nonnegotiable areas:
Hers: She can't abide dirty dishes left out in the kitchen or a dirty
bathroom.
His: He can't abide having to clean up his papers right after he's
finished with them.
Areas of flexibility: She can live with some clutter as long as there
isn't any dirt. He can cope with cleaning dishes and bathrooms as
long as he doesn't have to straighten up all the time.
Temporary compromise: They will both take responsibility for
keeping bathrooms and kitchens clean. She will not bug him about
238
clutter more than once a week. But if he doesn't deal with it by then,
she will pile it up and put it all on the floor of his home office.
Ongoing conflict: She will always hate clutter, he will always hate
orderliness.
Couple 2
Gridlocked problem: Very different comfort levels with expressing
emotions
The dreams within the conflict:
Hers: Being emotional is part of her self-identity and part of what
gives meaning to her life.
His: He sees being emotional as a weakness.
Nonnegotiable areas:
Hers: She cannot stop reacting with great passion to life.
His: He cannot become a highly emotional person just to please her.
Areas of flexibility: They both accept that their spouse cannot
change a basic personality trait.
Temporary compromise: They will be respectful of each other's
difference in this area. He will be receptive to her need to talk about
and share feelings. She will accept when he cannot do this.
Ongoing conflict: They will continue to have very different
approaches to expressing emotion.
Couple 3
Gridlocked problem: He enjoys spending time with other people at
parties, while she wants him to stay with her.
239
The dreams within the conflict:
His: To feel free and be able to explore by meeting new people at
social events
Hers: To be the center of his attention
Nonnegotiable areas:
His: He must have the freedom to enjoy himself and meet new
people.
Hers: She cannot abide her husband dancing with other women or
touching them, even in a friendly way.
Areas of flexibility:
His: He doesn't have to be completely separate from his wife at
parties.
Hers: She can tolerate her husband talking with other women for a
few minutes.
Temporary compromise: They will stay together at parties for about
half the time. The other half he can go off and mingle by himself. But
he will not dance with or touch other women--and if she tells him
she's upset by his behavior, he'll stop.
Ongoing conflict: He will always want to socialize, she will always
wish he would pay attention to just her.
Now see if you can outline your own problem in the same way.
First write a clear statement of what the problem is and which
dreams of each of yours is fueling it. Then note which areas are
nonnegotiable for each of you and which you are able to be flexible
about. Finally, write out a temporary compromise that you agree to
try for a brief period of time. It will be helpful if you also write a brief
description of your ongoing conflict to confirm that you both
understand it remains unresolved but can be lived with.
240
Step 5: say thank you
It may take more than one session to overcome gridlock on issues
that have been deeply troubling to your marriage. These sessions can
be stressful, no matter how diligently you attempt to accept each
other's viewpoint without judgment.
This exercise lets you finish on a positive note. The goal here is
to try to re-create the spirit of thanksgiving, in which you count your
blessings and look inward to express gratitude for all you have. This
may be particularly difficult to do after talking about gridlocked
marital conflict, but that's all the more reason to try.
Exercise 2: Say Thank You
Select from the following list three things you really appreciate about
your spouse. (Of course, you can add items not on the list.) Then tell
your spouse what these three things are. This can be as simple as a
statement like "I really like the way you are sensitive to my moods."
Your energy
Your strength
The way you are commanding
The way you let me direct things
How sensitive you are to me
How you support me and respond to my moods
Your ability to read me
The way you are when we make decisions
The way you let me be myself
Your skin
Your face
Your warmth
Your enthusiasm
Your hair
The way you touch me
How safe I feel with you
241
Your tenderness
Your imagination
Your eyes
The way I trust you
Your passion
How well you know me
Your gracefulness
The way you move
The way you kiss me
Your affection
Your playfulness
Your humor
How you look in clothes
Your loyalty to me
Your competence as a spouse
Your competence as a parent
What you are like as a friend
Your sense of style
Follow these five steps, and you'll be able to move out of
gridlock on your perpetual problems. Be patient with the process and
each other. By their very nature, these problems are tenacious. To
loosen their grip on your marriage will take commitment and faith on
both your parts. You'll know you're making progress when the issue
in question feels less loaded to you both--when you can discuss it
with your sense of humor intact, and it no longer looms so large that
it crowds out the love and joy in your relationship.
242
243
11
Principle 7: Principle 7:
Create Shared Meaning Create Shared Meaning
“We used to have a yuppie marriage," says Helen. "By that I mean it
was very superficial. We got along okay and really loved each other,
but I didn't feel that connected to Kevin. It was like we were
roommates who made love." Helen, who calls herself a "devout
feminist," had always prided herself on her independence. At first
she thought it was great that she and Kevin had their own lives--their
own careers, interests, and friends. But the longer they were married,
and especially after they had children, the more she felt something
was lacking. She didn't want to give up her strong sense of individual
identity, but she wanted more from her marriage. After attending our
workshop, she realized what it was: She wanted to feel more like she
and Kevin were a family.
If your marriage adheres to my first six principles, there's a
good chance that your relationship is stable and happy But if you
find yourself asking, "Is that all there is?" your situation may be
similar to Helen and Kevin's. What may be missing is a deeper sense
of shared meaning. Marriage isn't just about raising kids, splitting
chores, and making love. It can also have a spiritual dimension that
has to do with creating an inner life together--a culture rich with
244
symbols and rituals, and an appreciation for your roles and goals that
link you, that lead you to understand what it means to be a pan of the
family you have become.
Usually when we think of culture, we think in terms of large
ethnic groups or even countries where particular customs and cuisine
prevail. But a culture can also be created by just two people who have
agreed to share their lives. In essence, each couple and each family
create its own micro culture. And like other cultures these small units
have their customs (like Sunday dinner out), rituals (like a
champagne toast after the birth of each baby), and myths--the stories
the couple tell themselves (whether true, false, or embellished) that
explain their sense of what their marriage is like, what it means to be
part of their group.
Paula and Doug viewed themselves as the "runts" of their
respective families. Both were considered the least intelligent,
attractive, or likely to succeed of their siblings. But as it turned out,
all of their brothers and sisters ended up unmarried or divorced,
while Paula and Doug formed a happy, stable marriage, held steady
jobs, and raised great kids in a nice home. Part of their marriage's
culture, the story they tell themselves about themselves, is what a
great team they make, how feisty they are, how they thumbed their
noses at all the nay sayers and succeeded against the odds.
Developing a culture doesn't mean a couple sees eye to eye on
every aspect of their life's philosophy. Instead there is a meshing.
They find a way of honoring each other's dreams even if they don't
always share them. The culture that they develop together
incorporates both of their dreams. And it is flexible enough to change
as husband and wife grow and develop. When a marriage has this
shared sense of meaning, conflict is much less intense and perpetual
problems are unlikely to lead to gridlock.
It is certainly possible to have a stable marriage without sharing
a deep sense of what is meaningful about your lives together. Your
marriage can "work" even if your dreams aren't in sync. The last
chapter showed you just how to navigate your way around perpetual
problems so that you can live with them rather than ending up
gridlocked. It is important to accept that you each will probably have
some dreams that the other doesn't share but can respect. You may,
245
for example, adhere to different religions but have enough respect for
each other's spiritual journey to bridge the differences in your faiths.
But it is also true that a rewarding marriage is about more than
sidestepping conflict. The more you can agree about the
fundamentals in life, the richer, more meaningful, and in a sense
easier your marriage is likely to be. You certainly can't force
yourselves to have the same deeply held views. But some coming
together on these issues is likely to occur naturally if you are open to
each other's perspectives. A crucial goal of any marriage, therefore, is
to create an atmosphere that encourages each person to talk honestly
about his or her convictions. The more you speak candidly and
respectfully with each other, the more likely there is to be a blending
of your sense of meaning.
At our workshop Helen and Kevin were able to focus on the
spiritual side of their lives together by talking over some of the
questions you'll find later in this chapter. For the first time they spoke
earnestly about their own families, their family histories, values, and
symbols. When they returned home, Helen took out her family's old
photo album and showed Kevin pictures of her great- grandparents
who had come to America from Ireland. She told him the story she
had heard countless times about her great- grandparents' marriage--
how they had become engaged before her great-grandfather left for
America. He then remained true and devoted to her greatgrandmother during the four long years it took to save up enough
money to bring her over, too. The message of this story, she had come
to understand, was that loyalty is one of the backbones of marriage
and family life. Until now she had never expressed that to Kevin so
directly.
 He himself reminisced about some of his own family's talesespecially about his grandmother who singlehandedly ran a general
store in rural Kansas and almost went broke because she was always
giving away free food to poor neighbors during the Depression. The
townspeople all knew that she reserved a certain amount of her
goods for the town's needy families, who would come by ever'
Monday night at closing time. "My dad always said that we Mona
hans tend to be generous to the point of being foolish," he told Helen.
246
"But he always said it in a way that let you know he was very proud
that we were like that." Kevin told Helen how that perspective had
infused his own adulthood--from his insistence that they make large
charitable contributions to the size of the Christmas tips he gave out.
That conversation marked a turning point in Kevin and Helen's
marriage. From then on they talked frequently about values like
loyalty and generosity that had been instilled in them by hearing
family stories as children. Over time, as they heard each other's
family stories and passed them on to their children, each other's
stories became their stories, too--the stories of the new family that
they had created. Helen accepted and incorporated the stories and
values of the Mona hans that were important to Kevin into her own
life, and he did the same for
her heritage.
As I said, the more shared meaning you can find, the deeper,
richer, and more rewarding your relationship will be. Along the way
you'll also be strengthening your marital friendship--as emphasized
in my first three principles of a happy marriage. This in turn will
make it even easier to cope with any conflicts that crop up. That's the
beauty of the Seven Principles. They form a feedback loop that
ensures that as you work on each principle, it becomes easier to work
on the others.
Shared Meaning Questionnaire
To get a sense of how well you and your partner create a sense of shared
meaning in your lives together, answer the following questions.
Your Rituals of Connection
1. We see eye to eye about the rituals that involve family dinner times in
our home. T F
247
2. Holiday meals (like Thanksgiving, Christmas, Passover) are very special
and happy times for us (or we both hate them). T F
3. End-of-the-day reunions in our home are generally special times. T F
4. We see eye to eye about the role of TV in our home. T F
5. Bedtimes are generally good times for being close. T F
6. During the weekends we do a lot of things together that we enjoy and
value. T F
7. We have the same values about entertaining in our home (having
friends over, parties, and so on). T F
8. We both value, or both dislike, special celebrations (like birthdays,
anniversaries, family reunions). T F
9. When I become sick, I feel taken care of and loved by my spouse, T F
10. I really look forward to and enjoy our vacations and the travel we do
together. T F
11. Spending our morning time together is special to us. T F
12. When we do errands together, we generally have a good time, T F
13. We have ways of becoming renewed and refreshed when we are
burned out or fatigued. T F
Scoring: Give yourself one point for each "true" answer. If you score below
three, your marriage could stand some improvement in this area. Be
sure to work together on Exercise 3, which follows this questionnaire
Your roles
14. We share many similar values in our roles as husband and wife, TF
15. We share many similar values in our roles as mother and father. T F
16. We have many similar views about what it means to be a good friend
to others. T F
17. My partner and I have compatible views about the role of work in one's
life, T F
18. My partner and have similar philosophies about balancing work and
family life, T F
19. My partner supports what would see as my basic mission in my life.
T F
248
20. My partner shares my views on the importance of family and kin
(sisters, brothers, moms, dads) in our life together. T F
Scoring: Give yourself one point for each "true" answer. If you score below
three, your marriage could stand some improvement in this area. Be
sure to work together on Exercise 2, which follows this questionnaire.
Your Goals
21. We share many of the same goals in our life together. T F
22. If I were to look back on my life in very old age, I think I would see that
our paths had meshed very well. T F
23. My partner values my accomplishments. T F
24. My partner honors the personal goals I have that are unrelated to our
marriage. T F
25. We share many of the same goals for others who are important to us
(children, kin, friends, and community). T F
26. We have very similar financial goals. T F
27. We tend to have compatible worries about potential financial
disasters.TF
28. Our hopes and aspirations, as individuals and together, for our
children, for our life in general, and for our old age are quite compatible,
T F
29. Our life dreams tend to be similar or compatible. T F
30. Even when different, we have been able to find a way to honor our life
dreams. T F
Scoring: Give yourself one point for each "true" answer. If you score
below three, your marriage could stand some improvement in this area.
Be sure to work together on Exercise 3, which follows this questionnaire.
Your Symbols
31. We see eye to eye about what home means. T F
32. Our philosophies of what love ought to be are quite compatible. T F
33. We have similar values about the importance of peacefulness in our
lives. T F
249
34. We have similar values about the meaning of family. T F
35. We have similar views about the role of sex in our lives. T F
36. We have similar views about the role of love and affection in our
lives.TF
37. We have similar values about the meaning of being married. T F
38. We have similar values about the importance and meaning of money in
our lives. T F
39. We have similar values about the importance of education in our
lives.TF
40. We have similar values about the importance of fun and play in our
lives. T F
41. We have similar values about the significance of adventure. T F
42. We have similar values about trust. T F
43. We have similar values about personal freedom. T F
44. We have similar values about autonomy and independence. T F
45. We have similar values about sharing power in our marriage. T F
46. We have similar values about being interdependent, being a "we." T F
47. We have similar values about the meaning of having possessions, of
owning things (like cars, nice clothes, books, music, a house, and land).
T F
48. We have similar values about the meaning of nature and of our
relationship to the seasons. T F
49.We are both sentimental and tend to reminisce about things in our past
T F
50. We have similar views about what we want in retirement and old age.
T F

Scoring: Give yourself one point for each "true" answer. If you score
below three, your marriage could stand some improvement in this area.
Be sure to work together on Exercise 4, which follows this questionnaire.
The exercises below are really just a list of questions for you
both to answer and discuss. They are divided into the four categories
that usually form the bases of shared meaning between husband and
wife: rituals, roles, goals, and symbols. These questionnaires are not
designed to be completed in an evening or even a month.
250
Consider them starting-off points for many future discussions
and fireside chats.
To make the best use of these questions, focus on them one at a
time. You can even write your thoughts about the question in your
notebook. Then read each other's entries and discuss the question
face to face.
Talk about your differences on this issue as well as your areas
of common ground, areas that you can build upon. Find ways to
honor both of your values, philosophies, and dreams. Although in
many areas you may have separate needs, find ways to be supportive
of each other's. Where you differ fundamentally, find ways of being
respectful, of honoring the differences between you. (If this leads to
an argument, work through the exercises in the chapters concerning
Principles 4, 5, and 6 even if you've already done so. Write out, if you
like, your own family constitution, what you agree on about meaning
and shared philosophy of life.
Family rituals

It is a sad fact that less than a third of U.S. families eat dinner
together regularly, and more than half of those that do have the
television on during dinner. This effectively ends conversation
during dinner. Creating informal rituals when you can connect
emotionally is critical in a marriage.
Midnight Mass on Christmas Eve, lighting Kwaanza candles or
the menorah, Thanksgiving at Grandma's, family reunions: Most of
us were raised in families in which some rituals were considered
important. By making them a part of your married life (or coming up
with your own new ones together), they become your rituals as well
and further your identity as a family.
Jesse came from a very close-knit extended family on his
father's side--the Feld mans. From the time he was a little boy the
photographer at all of their family weddings was asked to spend a
few minutes rounding up all fifty or so Feld mans for the Feld man
Photo. Every member of his father's family, along with their spouses
251
and children, would gather together, the bride and groom seated in
the middle.
As a youngster, Jesse would roll his eyes and think posing for
the photo was a big joke. But when he fell in love with and married
Amanda, the ritual of the Feld man Photo took on a new meaning for
him. Suddenly he was the groom sitting on the chair surrounded by
his family. Now every time he looks at the Feld man Photo in his own
wedding album, he feels a sense of pride and connection, knowing
that Amanda has really joined his family This feeling has been
reinforced over the years, every time he attends another Feld man
wedding and he and Amanda pose along with the rest of the clan.
Rituals don't necessarily have to derive from your respective
childhoods and family histories. You can create your own. New
rituals might come from a sense of what your family lacked. If you
wished your family had gone on outings together on the weekends,
you may want to incorporate that into your weekly routine. Or if you
wish a bigger deal had been made out of the spiritual side of
Christmas, you may decide to attend Midnight Mass together every
year.
Sometimes rituals that don't seem quite so momentous can be
important for a family Nick and Halley for example, always celebrate
family birthdays by baking a cake together. This ritual started when
their son, who was then a toddler, was allergic to eggs, so they were
unable to buy birthday cakes at the bakery Over the years their son
got over his allergy, but the family ritual remained because it had
become meaningful to them. It gave them a chance to come together
and celebrate their family and the birthday in a very quiet, homey
way
Exercise 1: Rituals
In the following exercise, create your own family ritual of
connection by talking about what you want. Discuss what these
rituals (or lack of rituals) were like for you growing up, what the best
times and the disasters were like for you. Then "script" your ritual so
252
you will know who is expected to do what, and when. Make these
rituals something you do regularly and can look forward to.
1. How do we or should we eat together at dinner? What is the
meaning of dinnertime? What was dinnertime like in each of our
families growing up?
2. How should we part at the beginning of each day? What was this
like in our families growing up? How should our reunions be?
3. How should bedtime be? What was it like in our families growing
up? How do we want this time to be?
4. What is the meaning of weekends? What were they like in our
families growing up? What should they be like now?
5. What are our rituals about vacations? What were they like in our
families growing up? What should they mean now?
6. Pick a meaningful holiday. What is the true meaning of this
holiday to us? How should it be celebrated this year? How was it
celebrated in each of our families growing up?
7. How do we each get refreshed and renewed? What is the meaning
of these rituals?
8. What rituals do we have when someone is sick? What was this like
in our families growing up? How should it be in our family?
Sociologist William Doherry emphasized the importance of
rituals of connection in families. He and his wife, Leah, created the
tradition of after-dinner coffee in which their children played or did
homework while he and his wife had coffee and talked. They all
cleaned up after dinner, then Bill made coffee and brought it out to
Leah in the living room. It was a time of peace and connection. You
can continue building in family rituals of connection you would
cherish by creating the following:
•A weekly date for the two of you, away from children.
•Celebrations of triumph--ways of celebrating almost any minor
or major achievement and creating a culture of pride and praise in
your marriage.
•Rituals surrounding bad luck, setbacks, fatigue, or exhaustion.
How can you support, heal, and renew yourselves?
253
•Community rituals for entertaining friends, caring for other
people in your community, or opening your home to others you care
about.
•Rituals surrounding lovemaking and talking about it. These are
important events that get left till the very end of the day when
everyone is exhausted. Couples often think that lovemaking should
be spontaneous and don't want to plan for it. But if you think about
when sex was at its best, usually it's during courtship. Those
romantic dates were planned, down to what to wear, what perfume
or cologne to use, where to go, the music and wine after dinner, and
so on. So you need to plan for romance and sex. A ritual that makes
you feel emotionally safe in talking about what is good and what
needs improvement in lovemaking can be very helpful.
•Rituals for keeping in touch with relatives and friends. Family
events and reunions can be planned.
•Birthdays and special events that recur. Examples are holidays
of importance to you, religious celebration cycles, and anniversaries.
There are also important rites of passage that can be discussed,
such as confirmations, bat mitzvahs, graduations, and weddings.
Your roles in life
Our sense of our place in the world is based to a great extent on the
various roles we play--we are spouses, children, perhaps parents, and
workers of one kind or another. From the standpoint of marriage, our
perspective on our own roles and our mate's can either add to the
meaningfulness and harmony between us or create tension.
Your marriage will feel deeper to the degree that your
expectations of each other--what you feel your wife's or husband's
place in your family ought to be--are similar. We're not talking here
about seemingly superficial issues like who washes the dishes; we're
talking about deeper feelings about what you expect of yourself and
your spouse. For example, both Ian and Hilary believed that a
husband should be a protector and provider and the wife more of a
254
nurturer. Chloe and Evan believed in an egalitarian marriage in
which the spouses supported each other emotionally and financially.
Because in both of these marriages husband and wife had a similar
philosophy about their roles, their marriages worked. Of course,
were ian married to Chloe and Hilary to Evan, there'd be more cause
for friction.
Having similar views about parenting--for example, the values
you consider important to pass on to your children--also adds to a
marriage's meaning. So do questions about the kind of interaction
you should now have with your parents and siblings. (Do you
consider them part of your family, or outsiders you keep your
distance from?) Even your views of what it means to work--and the
meaning you attach to your own work--can deepen your sense of
connection with your spouse. In other words, to the extent that you
feel similarly about these issues, your marriage will be strengthened.
None of this means that you should (or, for that matter, could)
see eye to eye on every philosophical or spiritual aspect of life. For
example, couples who are in the same line of work may draw
different meanings from it. Johnny is passionate about being a
scientist. His work as a geologist forms a significant part of his
identity and colors how he sees the world. He feels personally
inspired by the scientific approach with its emphasis on objectivity
and analysis, and he takes great pride in being a geologist. If you ask
him what he is, he will say he is a geologist first. His wife, Molly, is
also a geologist, but she doesn't identify quite so deeply with her
profession. She sees herself as a woman first, rather than as a
scientist. But this poses no difficulty in their marriage. They connect
deeply in so many other areas of their lives together that this
difference is never a sticking point.
Exercise 2: Roles
The more you can talk to each other frankly about your deeply
held views about your roles in life, the more likely you are to reach a
255
consensus that makes sense and comes naturally to your family.
Musing over these questions separately and then together can help.
1. How do you feel about your role as a husband or wife? What does
this role mean to you in your life? How did your father or mother
view this role? How are you similar and different? How would you
like to change this role?
2. How do you feel about your role as a father or mother? What does
this role mean to you in your life? How did your father or mother
view this role? How are you similar and different? How would you
like to change this role?
3. How do you feel about your role as a son or daughter? What does
this role mean to you in your life? How did your father or mother
view this role? How are you similar and different? How would you
like to change this role?
4. How do you feel about your role as a worker (your occupation)?
What does this role mean to you in your life? How did your father
or mother view this role? How are you similar and different? How
would you like to change this role?
5. How do you feel about your role as a friend to others? What does
this role mean to you in your life? How did your father or mother
view this role? How are you similar and different? How would you
like to change this role?
6. How do you feel about your role in your community? What does
this role mean to you in your life? How did your father or mother
view this role? How are you similar and different? How would you
like to change this role?
7. How do you balance these roles in your life?
Personal goals

Part of what makes life meaningful are the goals we strive to achieve.
While we all have some very practical goals—like earning a certain
income--we also have deeper, more spiritual goals. For one person,
the goal may be to find peace and healing after a tumultuous, abusive
256
childhood. For another it may be to raise children who are goodhearted and generous. Many times we don't talk about our deepest
goals. Sometimes we haven't even asked ourselves these questions.
But when we start, it gives us the opportunity to explore something
that can have a profound impact on ourselves and our marriage.
Not only will you increase the intimacy of your marriage by
sharing your deepest goals with your spouse, but to the extent that
you work together to achieve shared goals, they can be a path toward
making your union even richer. For example, both Emilie and Alex
were committed to doing volunteer work for their church. Once their
kids were grown, they decided they wanted to leave a spiritual
legacy to their community. So he joined the board of directors of the
religious school, and she started an adult education program at the
church for people who wanted to become reacquainted with their
faith. "I would have done this on my own," says Emilie. "But feeling
in partnership with Alex about the importance of giving something
back to my community and my church has made it an even more
rewarding experience. I feel renewed not just in my faith but in my
marriage as well."
Exercise 3: Goals
Try to explore with your spouse the meaning of goals in your
individual lives and your marriage, ask yourselves the following
questions.
1. Write a "mission statement" of what your mission in life is. Write
your own obituary. What would you like it to say?
2. What goals do you have in life, for yourself, for your spouse, for
your children? What do you want to accomplish in the next five to
ten years?
3. What is one life dream that you want to fulfill before you die?
4. We often fill our time with things that demand our immediate
attention--putting out fires, so to speak. But what are the truly
important things in your life that are great sources of energy and
pleasure that you really need to block out time for, the important
things that keep getting postponed or crowded out?
257
5. What is the role of spirituality in your lives? What was this role in
your families growing up? How should this be in your family?
Shared symbols
Another sign of shared meaning in a marriage is that your lives are
surrounded by things that represent the values and beliefs you share.
Often, these "things" are literally objects. Religious icons like a
crucifix or mezuzah are the most obvious symbols of faith a couple
may display in their home. But there are other, more personalized
ones as well. For Jenna and Michael, their dining room table held
special significance. They had saved up for many years to have it
custom made by a local carpenter who was an expert carver. Every
time they opened it up for family celebrations, its beauty and
strength spoke to them of the beauty and stability of their own
marriage. Another family kept a little statuette of a baby angel on the
mantel in memory of their first baby, who was stillborn. The angel
commemorated the baby but also represented their own resilience
and deep love and support for each other, which had gotten them
through this tragedy and allowed them to go on to have a large,
happy family.
Some symbols are abstract but no less significant to a marriage.
Family stories, for example, can be symbolic of a whole set of values.
In that sense, Helen's story about her great-grandparents who kept
their love alive even when separated by an ocean symbolized the
family's deep sense of loyalty. Every time that story was retold (and
almost by definition, family stories do get told over and over again
through the years), it was symbolic of the great value they place on
loyalty Her husband Kevin's story of his great-grandmother's general
store and her gracious generosity toward the poor was also a
metaphor for another deeply held family value--that money is not as
important as being connected to your community. Even a home itself
can be of great symbolic meaning to a couple. They may view it not
only as the place they eat and sleep but as the spiritual center of their
258
lives together--the place where they consummate their love, where
their children were conceived and grew, and so on.
Exercise 4: Symbols
The following questions will help you talk to each other about the
significance of symbols in your marriage.
1. What symbols (such as photos or objects) show who our family is
in the world, what we value about being _____________(supply
your last names)
2. Family stories are also symbols--they often stand for and teach a
whole set of values, what are some stories about your family that
go way back in history, stories you are proud of and want to be a
part of the tradition your family continues?
3. What does a home mean to you? What qualities must it have for
you? What was a home like in your families growing up?
4. What in your life is symbolic of your philosophy of how to lead a
meaningful, good life? For example, giving to charity, or wearing a
crucifix, or lighting a candle for dead ancestors may be symbolic of
your sense of meaning. Do you feel that you are failing to do this to
the degree you'd like?
Feeling a sense of unity with your spouse on most of the deep,
burning issues is unlikely to occur overnight. Exploring these issues
together is really an ongoing, lifelong process. The goal shouldn't be
to agree on every aspect of what is profoundly meaningful to you,
but to have a marriage where you are both open to each other's most
dearly held beliefs. The more you create a marriage where these
convictions can be readily divulged, the more joyous will be the
journey through life that you share.
259
Afterword: Afterword:
What Now? What Now?
No book (or therapist can solve all of your marital problems. But by
incorporating these Seven Principles into your marriage, you really
can change the course of your relationship. Even making just a small
and gentle change in the trajectory of your marriage can have a
dramatic, positive effect over time. The catch, of course, is that you
have to build on the change and keep it going. Improving your
marriage is a kind of journey. Like all journeys it begins by
suspending disbelief, taking one small step, and then seeing where
you are and taking the next step. If you get stuck or take a few
missteps, reread portions of this book with an eye toward charting
where your marriage is now. Then you'll be able to figure how to
help it along in the right direction.
Once you feel your marriage is "on course," here are some ideas
to help you maintain momentum.
260
the magic five hours
When we followed up on couples who attended our Seattle
workshops, we wondered what would distinguish those couples
whose marriages continued to improve from those whose marriages
did not. Would we find that the successful group had dramatically
overhauled their lives? Far from it. To our surprise, we discovered
that they were devoting only an extra five hours a week to their
marriage. Although each couple had their own style of spending
these extra five hours, some clear patterns emerged. In general, what
these couples were doing was giving their marriage a concentrated
refresher course in the Seven Principles. The approach works so
phenomenally well that I've come to call it the Magic Five Hours.
Here's how you can do it, too:
Partings. Make sure that before you say good-bye in the morning
you've learned about one thing that is happening in your spouse's life
that day--from lunch with the boss to a doctor's appointment to a
scheduled phone call with an old friend.
Time: 2 minutes a day x 5 working days
Total: 10 minutes
Reunions. Be sure to engage in a stress-reducing conversation at the
end of each workday (see page 87).
Time: 20 minutes a day x 5 days
Total: 1 hour 40 minutes
Admiration and appreciation. Find some way every day to
communicate genuine affection and appreciation toward your
spouse.
Time: 5 minutes a day x 7 days
Total: 35 minutes
Affection. Kiss, hold, grab, and touch each other during the time
you're together. Make sure to kiss each other before going to sleep.
Think of that kiss as a way to let go of any minor irritations that have
261
built up over the day In other words, lace your kiss with forgiveness
and tenderness for your partner.
Time: 5 minutes a day x 7 days
Total: 35 minutes

Weekly date. This can be a relaxing, low-pressure way to stay
connected. Ask each other questions that let you update your love
maps and turn toward each other. (Of course, you can also use these
dates to talk out a marital issue or work through an argument you
had that week, if necessary.) Think of questions to ask your spouse
(like "Are you still thinking about redecorating the bedroom?"
"Where should we take our next vacation?" or "How are you feeling
about your boss these days?").
Time: 2 hours once a week
Total: 2 hours
Grand Total: Five hours!
As you can see, the amount of time involved in incorporating
these changes into your relationship is quite minimal. Yet these five
hours will help enormously in keeping your marriage on track.
Remember, working briefly on your marriage Remember, working briefly on your marriage
every day will do more for every day will do more foryour health and longevity ealth and longevity ealth and longevity
than working out at a health club. than working out at a health club.
The marital poop detector
Some marriage "experts" claim that a significant cause of
unhappiness in marriage is that husbands and wives just have
overblown expectations of each other. By lowering these
expectations, the argument goes; you become less likely to feel
disappointment. But Donald Baucom, Ph.D." of the University of
262
North Carolina has debunked this idea thoroughly by studying
couples' standards and expectations of each other. He has found that
people with the highest expectations for their marriage usually wind
up with the highest- quality marriages. This suggests that by holding
your relationship to high standards, you are far more likely to
achieve the kind of marriage you want than you are by looking the
other way and letting things slide.
Our research on newlyweds confirms what Baucom found. The
couples we studied who adjusted to high levels of negativity
(irritability, emotional distance) in their marriage ended up less
happy or satisfied years later. Those who refused to put up with lots
of negativity—who insisted on gently confronting each other when,
say, contempt or defensiveness threatened to become pervasive,
wound up happy and satisfied years later.
These findings suggest that every marriage ought to be
equipped with a built-in early warning system that lets you know
when your marital quality is in danger of deteriorating. I call this
system the Marital Poop Detector because it's really a way of saying
something just doesn't smell right!
Someone once said that to men the five most frightening words
in the English language are "Let's talk about our relationship." Truth
is, those words can be just as frightening to plenty of women. The
best way to conquer this fear is to talk about issues in your
relationship while they are still minor, before they build up steam
and become combustible. A Marital Poop Detector lets you do that.
Usually one member of a couple tends to take the lead in
sniffing out trouble. More often than not it is the wife. When her
husband gets cranky or withdrawn, she calls him on it and finds out
what's wrong. But there's no reason why you both can't perform this
function in your marriage.
Here is a list of questions to ask yourself once a week. It will
guide you in assessing how your relationship is faring. Just
remember to discuss these things using a softened startup and
without being critical of your spouse. The best approach is to say
something like "Hey I really feel out of touch with you. What's going
on?" (Be careful not to address any issues right before bedtime. This
could interfere with your sleep.)
263
Instructions: Use this questionnaire to assess how things went in your
marriage today (or lately), and whether you want to bring up any
issues. Check as many as you think apply. If you checked more than
four, think about talking things over gently with your partner, within
the next three days.
1. I have been acting irritable.
2. I have been feeling emotionally distant.
3. There has been a lot of tension between us.
4. I find myself wanting to be somewhere else.
5. I have been feeling lonely
6. My partner has seemed emotionally unavailable to me.
7. I have been angry.
8. We have been out of touch with each other.
9. My partner has little idea of what I am thinking.
10. We have been under a great deal of stress, and it has taken
its toll on us.
11. I wish we were closer right now.
12. I have wanted to be alone a lot.
13. My partner has been acting irritable.
14. My partner has been acting emotionally distant.
15. My partner's attention seems to be somewhere else.
16. I have been emotionally unavailable to my partner.
17. My partner has been angry.
18. I have little idea of what my partner is thinking.
19. My partner has wanted to be alone a lot.
20. We really need to talk.
21. We haven't been communicating very well.
22. We have been fighting more than usual.
23. Lately small issues escalate.
24. We have been hurting each other's feelings.
25. There hasn't been very much fun or joy in our lives.
264
Forgive yourself

After working through the Seven Principles, it is probably very clear
to you that there is no such thing as constructive criticism. All
criticism is painful. Unlike complaints—specific requests for change--
criticism doesn't make a marriage better. It inevitably makes it worse.
What causes a spouse to be chronically critical? We have discovered
that there are two sources. The first is an emotionally unresponsive
partner.Put simply, if Natalie keeps complaining to Jonah about
leaving his newspapers on the bathroom floor and he just ignores
her, eventually she is likely to start criticizing him--calling him a slob
instead of politely reminding him about recycling. This change in
Natalie's approach is understandable, but it is hardly helpful to her
marriage since her criticism will make Jonah even less responsive.
The only way out of this cycle is for both of them to change--which
won't be easy It takes courage to be less critical of an unresponsive
mate, and it takes courage to turn toward a partner who's always
harping on your flaws. But both changes are necessary to end the
cycle.
The other source of criticism in marriage comes from within. It
is connected to self-doubt that has developed over the course of one's
life, particularly during childhood. In other words, it begins as
criticism of oneself. Aaron cannot really appreciate or enjoy his own
accomplishments. When he has a setback in his business, he feels
deep down that he is worthless. When his business is successful, he
doesn't allow himself to be proud. There's a voice inside him that
says this is not good enough. He continually searches for approval
but cannot enjoy it or even accept it when it is offered.
What happens to Aaron when he marries Courtney? Since he
has trained his mind to see what is wrong, what is missing, and not
to appreciate what is there, it's difficult for him to rejoice in what's
right with Courtney or their marriage. So instead of appreciating
Courtney's wonderful qualities, including her sweetness, her
devotion, and the deep emotional support she offers him when he is
in danger of losing a major client, he focuses on what he considers
265
her flaws--that she is highly emotional, somewhat awkward socially,
and not as meticulously clean around the house as he'd like.
The story of Aaron and Courtney is what's wrong 85 percent of
the time in most marriages. If you consider yourself inadequate, you
are always on the lookout for what is not there in yourself and your
partner. And, let's face it: Anyone you marry will be lacking in
certain desirable qualities. The problem is that we tend to focus on
what's missing in our mate and overlook the fine qualities that are
there--we take those for granted.
If you recognize yourself in the description of the self-critic, the
best thing you can do for yourself and your marriage is to work on
accepting yourself with all of your flaws. As I look back on my own
life so far, I realize the immense difference it has made in my role as a
husband and a father for me to forgive myself for all of my
imperfections.
One route toward this forgiveness may be your personal
spiritual beliefs. My religion, Judaism, has helped me to cherish and
nourish what is good and strong in myself and in my relationship. In
Judaism prayer is primarily used either for thanksgiving or to praise.
Yet the religion claims that God does not require endless praise,
flattery, or thanks. So what is the purpose of these prayers? They are
not meant for God's benefit but to help the person who is praying.
These prayers are designed to help us appreciate the works of God,
this beautiful world we have inherited, and to notice and be thankful
for the blessings we continually receive. Whatever your religion,
there is a message in here for your marriage: Expressions of
thanksgiving and praise are the antidotes to the poison of criticism
and its deadly cousin, contempt. The following exercise will start you
on this path.
An Exercise in Thanksgiving
Step 1.For one week try to be aware of your tendency to criticize, to
see what is missing, to focus on what is not there and comment on it.
Try instead to focus on what is right. Notice what you have and what
others contribute. Search for things to praise. Begin with simple
266
things. Praise the world. Appreciate your own breathing, the sunrise,
the beauty of a work rainstorm, the wonder in your child's eyes. Utter
some silent words of thanksgiving (to no one in particular) for these
small wonders in your day. This will begin to change your focus on
the negative.
Step 2. Give at least one genuine, heartfelt praise to your spouse
each day for an entire week. Notice the effects of this exercise on your
partner and yourself. If you are able, extend the exercise one more
day. Then add another day. Extend the exercise to others—for
example, to your children. When you meet someone new, look for
what is special about this person. Appreciate these qualities.
Remember, this all has to be genuine and heartfelt. Don't be phony.
Notice these positive qualities. Enjoy them. Try to tell people what
you notice and genuinely appreciate about them, just find one thing
for each person. Ignore the shortcomings.
As you stretch the period of thanksgiving one day beyond a week,
and then another day, and then another, you'll receive a great gift:
You will begin to forgive yourself. Grace and forgiveness will enter
your world. This is what the spiritual "Amazing Grace" is all about.
You begin to enjoy your own accomplishments, rather than consider
them inadequate.
One of the most meaningful gifts a parent can give a child is to
admit his or her own mistake, to say, "I was wrong here" or "I'm
sorry." This is so powerful because it also gives the child permission
to make a mistake, to admit having messed up and still be okay It
builds in the forgiveness of self. In the same way, saying "I'm sorry"
and meaning it to your spouse is a very significant event. The more
you can imbue your relationship with the spirit of thanksgiving and
the graceful presence of praise, the more meaningful and fulfilling
your lives together will be. 